Cerebellopontine angle lipoma in a teenager.  Lipomas of the cerebellopontine angle are very rare lesions.  To date, 18 patients have been reported, 17 of whom were adults.  A second child is described with cerebellopontine angle lipoma.
The role of cellular maturation in neutrophil heterogeneity.  Previous studies have shown that many neutrophil (PMN) characteristics are heterogeneous but the origin of PMN heterogeneity is unknown.  It is unclear if PMN functional heterogeneity is secondary to maturational differences or due to distinct subpopulations of cells that possess different functional capacities.  The PMN 31D8 antigen is a useful probe for evaluation of PMN subpopulations.  The majority of PMNs (approximately 85%) exhibit a high intensity fluorescence after 31D8 monoclonal antibody (MoAb) labeling (31D8 enriched or "bright" PMNs) as determined by flow cytometric analysis.  These cells are more functional than cells with low intensity fluorescence (31D8 diminished or "dull" PMNs).  Various immunologic, clonogenic and functional techniques were used to study the expression of the 31D8 antigen in HL-60 cells and myeloid cells in order to evaluate antigenic and functional heterogeneity during morphologic maturation.  The results of this study indicate that the percentage of 31D8 antigen positive (31D8 antigen enriched and diminished) bone marrow cells increases from 20 +/- 11% in myeloblast cells to 68 +/- 10% in promyelocytes, 93 +/- 2% in myelocytes and 99 +/- 1% in bands and PMNs.  31D8 antigen enriched cells first appear at the myelocyte stage (32 +/- 10%) and increase in bands (52 +/- 13%), marrow PMNs (62 +/- 13%) and peripheral blood PMNs (88 +/- 4%).  These data indicate that the heterogeneous expression of 31D8 antigen in PMNs is due, at least in part, to maturational differences within the PMN population and raise the possibility that other heterogeneously expressed PMN characteristics are also maturationally derived.  They also suggest that 31D8 antigenic expression may be a more precise indicator of myeloid functional maturation than maturation as identified by cellular morphology.
Papillary cystic neoplasm of the pancreas: radiological and pathological characteristics in 11 cases.  Clinical charts, radiological features, macroscopic and microscopic findings, and clinical follow-up data were retrospectively reviewed in 11 patients with papillary cystic neoplasm of the pancreas (PCNP).  The patients were nine women and two men, aged from 13 to 51 years with a mean age of 25 years.  The greatest diameter of the PCNPs ranged from 2.5 cm to 14.0 cm with a mean size of 7.5 cm.  Six tumours were located in the tail of the pancreas, two in the body and three in the head.  Most patients complained of abdominal pain or a mass.  Ultrasonographic and/or computed tomography findings showed five solid, four mixed (solid and cystic) and two cystic types of tumour.  Angiographically, PCNP was either a hypovascular or mild hypervascular mass with a displacement of the surrounding vessels.  No vascular encasement was seen.  Macroscopically all 11 tumours consisted of a well defined solid mass with degenerative change of various widths, including haemorrhage, necrosis or dystrophic calcification, and were represented by three radiological types of PCNP.  The 11 patients with PCNP survived for from 3 to 253 months after curative resection without any signs of local recurrence or remote metastasis.  PCNP usually affects the distal portion of the pancreas of young women.  Despite its huge size, PCNP should be explored with aggressive surgical intent because of the inherently good prognosis.
CA72-4: a new tumour marker for gastric cancer.  To date, tumour markers for gastric cancer have proved unreliable.  In this study the value of a new serum marker, CA72-4, was compared with the serum activities of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA19-9 in a consecutive series of patients with gastric cancer.  The results show that the CA72-4 assay is significantly better at separating stage I and II disease from normal controls (P less than 0.01) than CEA (n.s.) or CA19-9 (n.s.).  CA72-4 also gave better differentiation between patients with positive and negative nodes (P less than 0.01) and between those who were serosa positive and negative (P less than 0.01).  CEA differentiated between patients with positive and negative nodes (P less than 0.05) but CA19-9 could not.  CA19-9 and CEA could not discriminate between patients who were serosa positive and negative.  In this study, at a specificity of 95 per cent, the sensitivities of CEA, CA19-9 and CA72-4 were 0.25, 0.41 and 0.94 respectively.  These preliminary findings indicate that CA72-4 is a reliable tumour marker of disease stage and activity in gastric cancer.  Further longitudinal studies are required for full evaluation of its clinical utility.
Treatment of adenocarcinoma of the cardia with synchronous chemotherapy and radiotherapy.  Twenty-nine evaluable patients with adenocarcinoma of the cardia were treated with synchronously administered chemotherapy (two cycles of 5-fluouracil and cisplatin and 30-36 Gy of radiation to determine whether these tumours are responsive to such treatment.  Complete regression of tumour was observed endoscopically in 19 patients, and partial regression in four.  Fourteen patients had their tumours resected and in six no microscopic tumour was found in the specimen.  Nine patients received additional radiotherapy to a total dose of 54-60 Gy instead of surgery.  Tumour response was associated with rapid reversal of dysphagia.  Only one patient required subsequent intervention for relief of dysphagia due to fibrous stricture.  Enhanced survival was associated with a complete endoscopic response to initial chemotherapy and radiotherapy, and a tumour of less than 5 cm in length.  The median survival of responding patients was 15 months.  Synchronous chemotherapy and radiotherapy was of major palliative benefit in this series and merits further evaluation.
Manometric evaluation of jejunal limb after total gastrectomy and Roux-Orr anastomosis for gastric cancer.  Total gastrectomy with Roux-Orr anastomosis is frequently performed for gastric cancer.  Since intestinal motility of the Roux limb has never been evaluated after this operation, pressure activity was investigated in the Roux limb of ten patients (aged 51-77 years) who had undergone total gastrectomy and Roux-Orr reconstruction.  Investigations were carried out during a 6-h fast and 3 h after a 605 kcal mixed meal.  During fasting only two patients had activity fronts and these were abnormal.  All ten patients displayed non-propagating bursts of contractions and three had discrete clustered contractions and high amplitude jejunal contractions.  The fed state was characterized by a severely reduced motor activity pattern and other abnormalities.  Total gastrectomy with Roux-Orr anastomoses provokes a relatively severe disturbance in intestinal activity.
Intraoperative ultrasonography and the detection of liver metastases in patients with colorectal cancer.  A total of 213 patients with carcinoma of the colon and rectum were examined to detect liver metastases.  The study compared preoperative ultrasonography and inspection and palpation of the liver during surgery with intraoperative ultrasonography.  Preoperative ultrasonography, inspection and palpation identified 238 metastases in 42 patients.  Intraoperative ultrasonography detected 116 previously unrecognized metastatic tumours during 40 surgical procedures (P less than 0.01).  High resolution intraoperative ultrasonography is safe and more accurate than preoperative imaging and surgical exploratory methods.  The examination is simple to perform and success appears to be related to careful attention to detail.
The effect of the gastrin receptor antagonist proglumide on survival in gastric carcinoma.  Gastric cancer remains a disease with a very poor prognosis, and there is no safe and effective form of therapy for advanced disease.  Evidence is now abundant to show that gastrin stimulates the growth of both gastric and colorectal cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, and that blockade of gastrin receptors can prolong survival in xenografted nude mice.  We have thus performed a randomized, controlled study of the gastrin/cholecystokinin receptor antagonist proglumide as therapy in 110 patients with gastric carcinoma.  Proglumide had no overall effect on survival (Mantel-Cox statistic = 0.5, P = 0.48).  The 95% confidence interval for the proglumide treated group was 260 to 474 days compared to 230 to 372 days for the control group.  No significant difference was seen with proglumide, which has a relatively low affinity with the gastrin receptor and also has partial agonist activity.  Drugs that are far more specific and potent gastrin receptor antagonists are becoming available, which may have a greater effect on survival, and further clinical trials of such compounds are clearly indicated to determine the efficacy of hormonal control of gastrointestinal malignancy.
Autopsy-documented cure of multiple myeloma 14 years after M2 chemotherapy.  Multiple myeloma was diagnosed in a 65-year-old woman in 1974 who thereafter received five-drug M2 chemotherapy.  All protein abnormalities subsequently returned to normal and serial bone marrow studies documented complete bone marrow remission.  Destructive bone lesions persisted radiographically, but did not progress.  In 1987, a localized sigmoid adenocarcinoma was resected.  In 1988, the patient presented with multiple brain metastases associated with a primary pulmonary adenocarcinoma that proved rapidly fatal.  At autopsy, no evidence of multiple myeloma was found.  This report describes the first tissue-documented cure of multiple myeloma 14 years after diagnosis and initiation of M2 chemotherapy.  The possible association of multiple myeloma with other malignancies is also discussed.
Prospective evaluation of radiologically directed fine-needle aspiration biopsy of nonpalpable breast lesions.  The application of fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) to the diagnosis of nonpalpable breast lesions was evaluated with a new method which uses standard needle localization under mammographic guidance to assure accurate sampling by FNAB.  This method was prospectively applied to 100 mammographically detected breast lesions in 100 women (mean age, 53 years).  All 100 patients underwent surgical excision of these nonpalpable lesions after cytologic aspiration.  Sufficient aspirated material was obtained for cytologic diagnosis from 91 patients (91%).  The histologic and cytologic interpretations were then compared.  Twenty malignancies were ultimately diagnosed by histology (12 invasive ductal carcinoma, six ductal carcinoma in situ, and two lobular carcinoma in situ), of which 17 had been cytologically diagnosed.  There were no false-positive diagnoses of malignancy by FNAB.  False-negative readings (3.3%) included two cases of lobular carcinoma in situ and one case of ductal carcinoma in situ.  This technique thus demonstrated a sensitivity of 85%, specificity of 100%, and overall diagnostic accuracy of 96.7% for the nonsurgical detection of malignancy in nonpalpable breast lesions.  These results suggest that the established safety, reliability, and cost-effectiveness of FNAB can be maintained in this clinical setting.  This procedure may obviate the need for open surgical biopsy in those patients with an unequivocal diagnosis of malignancy.  It can also be done using standard techniques and equipment available in many community hospitals.
Acute T-cell leukemia/lymphoma mimicking Hodgkin's disease with secondary HTLV I seroconversion.  The authors observed a pleiomorphic lymphoma mimicking Hodgkin's lymphoma in a French Guyana black woman lacking antibodies for human T-cell lymphoma/leukemia virus type I (HTLV I).  After two courses of chemotherapy with either mechlorethamine, vincristine, procarbazine, and prednisone (MOPP) or doxorubicin, bleomycin, vincaleukoblastine, and dacarbazine (ABVD), a typical acute T-cell leukemia/lymphoma developed with HTLV I seroconversion.  Specific HTLV I DNA sequences were detected using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on a lymph node biopsy obtained before chemotherapy.  The mechanisms of the seroconversion are discussed.
Immunohistochemical studies on the main entrance-route of CA19-9 into the peripheral venous blood of gastric cancer patients. Correlation with CA19-9 levels in peripheral and portal blood.  The correlation between CA19-9 levels of portal and peripheral venous blood, and immunohistochemical variables of cancer lesions was examined in 53 gastric cancer patients and eight patients with benign diseases.  Immunohistochemically, CA19-9 was found in 33 (62.5%) of 53 primary lesions.  The antigen was found in the cancer cells of invasive lymphatics and node metastases of every CA19-9 localized cancer, although the cancer cells in veins showed little or no CA19-9.  There was little or no antigen in the cancer cells in veins, lymphatics, or metastases of 20 CA19-9 nonlocalized primary lesions.  Patients with CA19-9 nonlocalized cancer or with benign diseases showed no elevation of the antigen levels in peripheral or portal blood.  CA19-9 levels of portal blood (mean, 76.4 U/ml; positive rate, 33.3%) were not different from those of peripheral blood (mean, 91.5 U/ml; positive rate, 33.3%).  Additionally, the antigen levels of the blood in patients with lymphatic invasion or node metastases were significantly higher than those in patients without the invasion or the metastases, and every patient without the invasion showed no elevation of the antigen.  These results suggest that production of the antigen in cancer cells may be a premise of CA19-9 elevation in peripheral blood and that CA19-9 may be drained by the thoracic duct of the lymphatic system via node metastases or invasive lymphatics, but not by the hematogenous portal system.
Establishment of an erythroid cell line (JK-1) that spontaneously differentiates to red cells.  The authors established a new hemopoietic cell line (JK-1) from a patient with chronic myelogenous leukemia in erythroid crisis.  This JK-1 line predominantly consists of immature cells, but a small number of mature erythroblasts and red cells can be consistently seen without any specific differentiation inducer.  The JK-1 cells grow in suspension culture supplemented with human plasma and carry double Philadelphia chromosomes.  Hemoglobin staining with benzidine was positive for about 20% of cells and the type of the hemoglobin was for the most part HbF.  Surface-marker analysis revealed JK-1 cells positive for glycophorin A, EP-1, and HAE9.  The proportion of mature cells was elevated by the addition of delta-aminolevulinic acid.  Erythropoietin (EPO) enhanced the growth of JK-1 cells either in the suspension or in methylcellulose semisolid culture.  The total number of EPO receptors was 940 per cell, of which 220 sites had an affinity higher than the other 720 sites.  This is the first report of an established human erythroid cell line which spontaneously undergoes terminal differentiation.
Mammographic screening of women with increased risk of breast cancer.  Five hundred one women from Dallas County, Texas who participated in the American Cancer Society 1987 Texas Breast Screening Project were selected because of a self-reported family history of breast cancer (cases).  They were matched with 501 randomly selected women from the same county with no family history (controls).  Although there was a statistically significant trend with age for an increasing proportion of women to report having undergone mammography, there was no significant difference when comparing mammographic histories of cases with controls after controlling for age (31.5% versus 35.1%, P = 0.33).  Significantly more cases (79%) perceived their risk for breast cancer to be moderate or greater compared with controls (54%, P less than 0.0001), but mammographic histories were not different when controlling for perceived risk.  Both cases and controls cited lack of physician referral and cost as their reasons for not having undergone mammography.  Women at increased risk for breast cancer (because of their family history) are not undergoing regular mammographic screening despite their self-awareness of the increase in their risk.
Murine monoclonal anti-idiotype antibody as a potential network antigen for human carcinoembryonic antigen.  Carcinomas of the gastrointestinal tract are not curable by standard therapies.  Thus, new therapeutic approaches for this disease are needed.  This study proposes the use of anti-Id mAb as Ag substitutes to induce anti-tumor immunity in gastrointestinal cancer patients.  Recently, we have generated and characterized one monoclonal anti-Id antibody, designated 3H1 (Ab2), which mimics biologically and antigenically a distinct and specific epitope of the 180,000 m.w.  carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) primarily expressed in high density by human pancreatic and colonic tumor cells.  This epitope is unique to CEA and not present on other CEA-related lower m.w.  members of the Ag family also found on normal tissues.  The antigenic determinant as defined by the mAb 8019 (Ab1) against which the Ab2, 3H1 was raised, is absent on normal adult tissues by immunoperoxidase staining and haematopoietic cells including granulocytes by flow cytometry analysis.  Anti-Id (Ab2) 3H1 induced CEA-specific antibodies in mice and rabbits.  The immune sera from both mice and rabbits competed with Ab1 for binding to the colon carcinoma cell line LS174T and inhibited the binding of radioiodinated Ab1 to Ab2.  This indicates that anti-anti-Id (Ab3) in mice and rabbits share idiotopes with Ab1 (8019).  Furthermore, monoclonal Ab3 that bind to CEA have been generated from mice immunized with 3H1.  The Ab3 (both polyclonal as well as monoclonal) immunoprecipitated the same 180,000 m.w.  CEA as Ab1 (8019) by Western blotting analysis and showed almost identical immuno-staining patterns as Ab1 on colonic adenocarcinoma tissue sections from several patients.  Collectively these data suggest that Ab2 3H1 could potentially be used clinically as a network Ag for immunotherapy of patients with CEA positive tumors.
Regulation of HLA class II molecule expressions by IFN-gamma. The signal transduction mechanism in glioblastoma cell lines.  We examined the signal transduction mechanism responsible for the IFN-gamma-induced HLA class II molecule expressions on glioblastoma cell lines, T98G and A172.  A series of experiments demonstrated that the activation of protein kinase C (PKC) is involved in the DR and DP molecule expressions on T98G cells.  In addition to the activation of PKC, calcium influx appeared to be involved in the DR and DP molecule expressions on T98G.  Northern blot analyses with actinomycin D or cycloheximide revealed that these second messengers induce the transcription of DRA and B and DPA and B genes without de novo protein synthesis.  Furthermore, we examined the region of the DPB gene that is responsible for IFN-gamma-induced gene transcription by gene transfer of a series of 5' and 3' deletion mutants in which the upstream region of the DPB was linked to a reporter gene, chloramphenicol acetyltransferase.  By using these deletion mutants, it appeared that the region between -152 and -126 bp contains a critical IFN-gamma-responsive element.  Taken together, these results suggest that IFN-gamma activates PKC and stimulates calcium influx, resulting in the induction of transcription of DRA and B and DPA and B genes without de novo protein synthesis.  In DPB gene, we speculate that preexiting protein(s) phosphorylated by PKC in the presence of Ca2+ might directly bind or indirectly interact with the region between -152 and -126 bp of the upstream sequence, leading to the induction of the transcription (possibly in concert with other nuclear protein(s) bound to the promoter sequences).
Low doses of IL-4 injected perilymphatically in tumor-bearing mice inhibit the growth of poorly and apparently nonimmunogenic tumors and induce a tumor-specific immune memory.  The ability of rIL-4 to trigger host reactivity against both a chemically induced fibrosarcoma (CE-2) and a spontaneous adenocarcinoma (TS/A) of BALB/c mice was studied.  Daily local s.c.  administration around tumor draining lymph nodes of 10 injections of progressive amounts (0.00001 to 1000 pg/day) of rIL-4 induced appreciable inhibition of the growth of both tumors after a dose-response survival curve peaking at 0.1 pg/day.  Inasmuch as rIL-4 has no direct antitumor activity, as shown by in vitro tests, host immune reactivity plays a fundamental role in this lymphokine activated tumor inhibition (LATI).  LATI, in fact, is abolished when recipient mice are sublethally irradiated or treated with cyclosporin A, or when the reactivity of CD4+ lymphocytes is suppressed, whereas it is not affected by anti-asialo GM1 antibody.  The morphologic data show that rIL-4 LATI rests on the recruitment of several cell reaction mechanisms, among which those that are nonspecific seem to predominate.  rIL-4 LATI also leads to a state of long lasting and specific immune memory: the growth of a second contralateral tumor challenge is significantly impaired after LATI.  This immune memory takes place after LATI of both the poorly immunogenic CE-2 fibrosarcoma and the TS/A adenocarcinoma, previously classed as nonimmunogenic on the basis of immunization-protection tests.  In the latter case, adoptive transfer experiments show that Thy-1+ lymphocytes and, in particular, the CD4 cell-depleted T lymphocyte subpopulation, are responsible for the immune memory.  Finally, the ability of rIL-4 to trigger LATI is greater than that of the most effective doses of rIL-2, rIL-1 beta, and IFN-gamma, whereas its association with rIL-1 beta induces a more effective immune memory.
Abnormal processing of pro-IGF-II in patients with hepatoma and in some hepatitis B virus antibody-positive asymptomatic individuals.  Hepatomas are a common malignancy in countries with a high prevalence of hepatitis B virus infections.  These tumors may present with severe persistent hypoglycemia.  We have studied the possible relationship of production of insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) by these tumors and the development of hypoglycemia.  Mean IGF-II concentration was not significantly higher in 23 patients with hypoglycemia than in nine patients with euglycemia (542 +/- 61 [SE] micrograms/L vs 382 +/- 52 micrograms/L).  Serum IGF-I was more suppressed in patients with hypoglycemia (16 +/- 3 micrograms/L) than in patients with euglycemia (57 +/- 18 micrograms/L).  Because an increased percentage of IGF-II in serum of patients with hypoglycemia who have other tumors is present as partially processed pro-IGF-II ("big" IGF-II), we passed sera of patients with hypoglycemia and patients with euglycemia with hepatomas through acidic Bio-Gel P-60 columns.  We found that 57% +/- 4.6% of the IGF-II in sera from patients with hypoglycemia was present as big IGF-II compared with 22% +/- 3% in patients with euglycemia with hepatomas (not significantly different from that in normal controls).  Four of 11 apparently healthy control subjects who were hepatitis B virus positive also had increased percentages of big IGF-II, suggesting that abnormal processing of pro-IGF-II may result from subtle changes in liver function with this infection.  It remains to be determined whether these subjects with increased big IGF-II are at increased risk for the development of hepatomas.  In conclusion, we have confirmed marked suppression of IGF-I in the sera of patients with hepatoma and hypoglycemia.
Changes in surgical treatments: the example of hysterectomy versus conization for cervical carcinoma in situ.  From 1969 through 1985, 4584 women in the state of New Mexico were diagnosed with carcinoma in situ of the cervix.  Of these women, 65.5% underwent hysterectomy while 31.1% had a conservative therapy (primarily conization).  Over the 17-year period, there was a steady increase in the percentage of women receiving conservative therapies, from 11.8% in 1969 to 50.3% in 1985.  Younger women, unmarried women and American Indian women were more likely to receive conservative therapy.  This marked shift in therapeutic approach occurred during a time of apparent controversy as to the optimal treatment for cervical carcinoma in situ, and illustrates a rapid change in surgical practice in the absence of any controlled trials comparing the two major treatment modalities.
Response of oral leukoplakia to beta-carotene.  Leukoplakia is associated with increased risk of oral cancer and is considered a premalignant lesion.  Retinoids, particularly 13-cis retinoic acid, can frequently reverse leukoplakia.  However, these drugs have considerable toxicity and are not suitable for large-scale use in the prevention of oral cancer.  Beta-carotene is a naturally occurring, nontoxic carotenoid with biologic properties that suggest that it might be efficacious against oral leukoplakia.  In 1986, we began a randomized study of 13-cis retinoic acid (1 mg/kg/d) versus beta-carotene (30 mg/d) in leukoplakia.  However, owing to the marked differences in toxicity between the two compounds outlined in the consent form, 11 of the initial 16 eligible patients refused to participate unless they were "guaranteed" beta-carotene.  Therefore, the study design was changed to a phase II trial of beta-carotene in which the compound was given daily for 3 months.  Responding patients were continued for another 3 months of treatment.  All lesions were examined histologically at entry.  Responses were monitored by bidimensional measurements and photography done at entry, then monthly while on treatment and at study completion.  Twenty-four evaluable patients were treated, and 17 had major responses (two complete, 15 partial), a response rate of 71% (95% confidence limits, 53% to 89%).  There was no significant toxicity requiring drug discontinuation or dose reduction.  These results indicate that beta-carotene has substantial activity in oral premalignancy.  Because of its lack of toxicity, it is an excellent candidate for a preventive agent for oral cancer.
Pharmacodynamics in cancer therapy.  Our understanding of anticancer pharmacodynamics, and the relationships between pharmacologic measurements and clinical effects, has grown markedly in recent years due to advances in analytical and computational technology.  Although methotrexate plasma levels have been empirically used to guide leucovorin dosing during high-dose methotrexate therapy, there has been no other standard use of therapeutic drug monitoring in oncology.  More recently, investigators have attempted to titrate precisely the dose of antineoplastic agents based on previously derived models and real-time analysis of plasma drug or tissue concentrations.  Studies have been completed or are in progress using hexamethylene bisacetamide, etoposide, teniposide, fluorouracil (FUra), and cytarabine (ara-C).  Future studies will focus on optimal sampling strategies, analysis of intermediate biochemical end points, combination chemotherapy, modulation by colony-stimulating factors, and more sophisticated pharmacodynamic models.
Characteristics and biological role of steroid hormone receptors in neuroepithelial tumors   Tissue samples from 57 patients with neuroepithelial tumors (25 glioblastomas, 18 anaplastic astrocytomas, and 14 astrocytomas) were analyzed in order to evaluate the presence of estrogen, progesterone, glucocorticoid, and androgen receptors.  Glucocorticoid- and androgen-specific binding proteins were present in 38.6% and 21.6% of the cases, respectively.  Only a few tumors showed estrogen or progesterone receptors.  A correlation was found between grade of anaplasia, patient's sex and age, and presence of glucocorticoid and androgen receptors.  The biological role of these two receptors was investigated in 10 primary cell cultures derived from neuroepithelial tumors.  For this purpose, dexamethasone and testosterone were added to culture medium at different concentrations (from 50 to 0.016 micrograms/ml).  A significant stimulation of the cell growth was observed in four of five glucocorticoid receptor-positive cultures when dexamethasone in doses ranging from 2 to 0.016 microgram/ml was added to the culture.  No modulation of the growth was observed in glucocorticoid receptor-negative cultures at the same doses.  Higher dexamethasone doses induced a significant decrease of the growth index independently from the glucocorticoid receptor status.  All of the cultures tested for testosterone activity were negative for androgen receptors.  This hormone induced an inhibition of the growth index at doses ranging from 50 to 0.4 micrograms/ml.  The data suggest that neuroepithelial tumors contain specific glucocorticoid and androgen binding proteins.  Glucocorticoid receptors modulate the growth of cultured neuroepithelial tumors in the presence of different concentrations of dexamethasone.
Lymphocele: the spectrum of scintigraphic findings in lymphoceles associated with renal transplant.  Lymphocele is a well recognized complication of renal transplant surgery.  We performed a retrospective review of 305 renal transplant patients with over 2,500 scintigraphic exams to describe the pattern of activity on technetium-99m-DTPA blood flow and dynamic imaging, and iodine-131-OIH studies.  Diagnostic criteria for a lymphocele were ultrasonic evidence of a perirenal fluid collection and analysis of that fluid that demonstrated BUN, creatinine, and electrolytes similar to the patient's plasma.  Scintigraphic findings were attributed to a lymphocele if abnormalities were in the same area as the ultrasound fluid collection.  Scintigraphic findings attributable to lymphocele resolved in all patients following surgical drainage or peritoneal window placement.  Six of the 11 documented lymphoceles demonstrated a cold defect on initial dynamic images that "filled in" to equal background activity and another exceeded background.  Three cases showed a rim of increased activity surrounding the lymphocele ("rim sign").
Scintigraphic evaluation of aggressive fibromatosis.  Despite its benign microscopic appearance, aggressive fibromatosis has potential to recur and infiltrate neighboring tissues.  Therefore, it is necessary to determine the exact extent before therapy.  In the present study, 11 cases of aggressive fibromatosis were examined scintigraphically using [99mTc(V)]dimercaptosuccinic acid (11 cases) and 67Ga-citrate (7 cases).  Technetium-99m-(V)-dimercaptosuccinic acid demonstrated all lesions, while 67Ga-citrate detected 57% of the cases.
N-[18F]fluoroacetyl-D-glucosamine: a potential agent for cancer diagnosis   Positron labeled substrates such as sugars, amino acids, and nucleosides have been investigated for the in-vivo evaluation of biochemical processes in cancerous tissue.  Hexosamines are obligatory structural components of many biologically important macromolecules, including membrane glycoproteins and mucopolysaccharide.  We evaluated a new synthesized pharmaceutical, N-[18F]fluoroacetyl-D-glucosamine (18F-FAG), which is a structural analog of N-acetyl-D-glucosamine.  C3H/HeMsNRS mice bearing spontaneous hepatomas were used for the tissue distribution study.  At 60 min after injection, high uptakes were found in tumor (5.16, mean value of %dose/g), liver (3.71), and kidney (3.27).  The tumor uptake of 18F-FAG showed the highest value in all tissue.  In the PET study, VX-2 carcinoma of the rabbit was clearly visualized.  Our preliminary results suggest that 18F-FAG has potential as a new agent for tumor imaging.
Desmoplastic variant of ameloblastoma: report of a case and review of the literature.  A case of desmoplastic variant of ameloblastoma is reported.  The lesion, in a 36-year-old Japanese woman, was successfully treated by partial maxillectomy.  Reconstruction was carried out with a block of hydroxyapatite about 7 years and 6 months later.  Six cases, including our case, reported up to the present are summarized and reviewed.
Characterization of the effect of two 4-methyl piperidine derivatives of hemicholinium-3, A-4 and A-5, on choline transport.  A-4 and A-5 are tertiary and N-methyl quaternary 4-methylpiperidine analogs of hemicholinium-3 (HC-3).  Previous work in this laboratory has shown A-4 and A-5 to be inhibitors of the sodium-dependent, high affinity choline uptake system (SDHACU).  Their effects on choline transport were characterized further using neuroblastoma 41A3 cells.  These cells rapidly take up choline through two separate mechanisms: a SDHACU system and a sodium-independent, low affinity uptake system (SILACU).  A-4, A-5 and HC-3 decreased 5 microM choline transport in a dose-dependent fashion.  The compounds were unable to decrease choline transport at 250 microM choline suggesting that they are inactive with respect to SILACU.  All three compounds significantly increased the Km but not the Vmax for the SDHACU system, suggesting a competitive mechanism of inhibition.  Ki values ranged from 18 to 25 microM for A-4, 20 to 26 microM for A-5 and 68 to 75 microM for HC-3.  Dose-response curves for inhibition of choline transport by A-5 and HC-3 were not changed by a 24-hr pre-exposure of the cells to each inhibitor.  However, after a 24-hr pre-exposure to A-4, a significantly different dose-response curve was obtained compared to the dose-response curve for A-4 in untreated cells.  After a 24-hr pre-exposure, a 4-hr recovery period was sufficient to remove the effect of each compound.  These data suggest that A-4 and A-5, like HC-3, inhibit the SDHACU, competitively and reversibly.
Increasing annual incidence of primary malignant brain tumors in the elderly   Between 1973 and 1985, total age-adjusted cancer incidence in the United States (all races, men and women) rose by 10.7%, with an average annual percentage change of +0.9%.  Analysis of reported age-specific incidence of primary malignant brain tumors over the same years demonstrates that incidence rates increased dramatically between 1973/1974 and 1985.  In 1985, incidence rates for persons aged 75-79, 80-84, and 85 years of age and over were 187%, 394%, and 501%, respectively, of rates in 1973/1974.  Similar increases were found in both men and women, analyzed separately and combined.  Average annual percentage changes in primary brain tumor incidence were +7.0%, +20.4%, and +23.4% in these age ranges, respectively.  Reported incidence in younger persons varied little over the same period of time.  The most common histologic type of primary brain tumor in the elderly was of glial origin, predominantly the glioblastoma multiforme and astrocytoma.  These tumors are highly malignant and invariably fatal.  Two possible causes may explain the increased incidence in the elderly: the introduction and extensive use of x-ray computed tomography since 1973 and/or a true increase in incidence occurring independently of diagnostic advances.
Effect of prostaglandin E in multiple experimental models: V. Effect on tumor/host interaction.  Prostaglandin E (PGE) has long been incriminated as a cause of the immunosuppression seen in cancer patients and for the increased rates of tumor growth due to the impairment of the immunologic response to the tumor.  We have investigated the effect of PGE on tumor-host interaction by utilizing a parenterally administered long-acting PGE derivative, 16,16-dimethyl-prostaglandin E (dPGE).  Administration of dPGE was found to decrease the rate of tumor growth but at a cost of decreasing tumor-free body mass.  The dPGE did not alter resting metabolic rates but did alter some parts of brain dopamine metabolism and significantly decreased the serum level of multiple amino acids.  In conclusion, elevated PGE levels may significantly alter metabolism in tumor patients.
Malignant melanoma occurring during pregnancy: a report of the Northern Israel Oncology Center (1968-1988).  Medical records of seven patients treated within a 20 year period for malignant melanoma during pregnancy were reviewed.  No significant detrimental prognostic effects could be attributed to pregnancy.  The current literature on melanoma and pregnancy is discussed.  Based on this, pregnancy seems not to be contraindicated in melanoma patients.
Renal vein leiomyosarcoma.  The 11th case of primary leiomyosarcoma of the renal vein is reported.  Unique features of this case included concomitant resection of an isolated hepatic metastasis, intraoperative radiation therapy, and the use of electron microscopy and immunohistochemical stains in confirming the diagnosis.  A review of the previously reported cases shows a tendency toward slow tumor growth and infrequent recurrence (18%).  Metastases are common (82%), primarily to the lung and liver.  Aggressive surgical resection and adjuvant radiation therapy, including intraoperative radiation therapy, are recommended.  Adjuvant chemotherapy should be considered, although its benefits at present are unclear.
Adrenal carcinosarcoma.  The clinical and pathologic features of a case of adrenal carcinosarcoma are reported.  Although synchronous malignancy of the adrenal gland has been described, no case of an adrenal tumor combining both carcinomatous and sarcomatous elements has been previously documented.  This neoplasm is extremely aggressive with distant metastasis arising from the sarcomatous component, and rapid progression despite multimodal therapy.
Utility of surgical margins in the radiotherapeutic management of soft tissue sarcomas.  Seventy-four adult patients with localized soft tissue sarcomas were treated with radiation therapy following surgery between 1965 and 1988.  Fifty-three were treated after the first excision of their tumor with 6 (11.3%) local recurrences.  Twenty-one received radiation after excision of recurrent disease with 11 (52.4%) local failures (P less than .0005).  Metastatic disease occurred in 14 (26.4%) of the primary tumors and 8 (38.1%) with multiple previous excisions (P less than .48).  Of those patients treated for primary sarcoma, there were no local failures with pathologically wide margins or if a single margin was microscopically positive.  Local failure occurred in 4 of 26 (15.4%) if the tumor was merely enucleated and in 2 of 11 (18.2%) who had grossly positive surgical margins (P not significant).  Local failure was also more common in truncal locations (33.3%) as compared with extremity locations (8.7%, P = .1359).  Additional factors analyzed which adversely affected prognosis included tumor grade, stage, and inadequate radiation dose.
Acral melanoma: a review of 185 patients with identification of prognostic variables.  One hundred eight-five patients with acral melanoma treated since 1972 were reviewed.  These included 53 subungual lesions, 123 plantar lesions, and 9 palmar lesions.  Eighty percent presented with stage I disease.  Mean age was 57 years.  Males outnumbered females 1.1:1.  Seventeen percent (17%) were blacks.  Actuarial 10-year survival was 58% for stage I patients and 35% for stage II patients.  Univariate Cox regression analyses identified 5 prognostic variables affecting survival: stage at diagnosis (P less than 0.001), race (P less than 0.001), ulceration (P = 0.012), Clark's level (P = 0.014), and thickness of the primary lesion (P = 0.013).  Factors unrelated to survival included sex of the patient, site (volar vs.  subungual), histology, and treatment with amputation.  Multivariate analysis for patients with stage I lesions identified race (P = 0.001) and ulceration (P = 0.018) as significant variables, with thickness approaching significance (P = 0.094).  In an additional series of 71 patients with melanomas arising from extremity sites near the junction of glabrous and non-glabrous skin, survival was significantly poorer for those arising from glabrous skin (P = 0.024), and reflects a higher incidence of metastatic disease at diagnosis.  Specific active immunotherapy was the principal adjuvant used for these patients, and survival was comparable to that reported with regional perfusion therapy.  Acral melanoma a) has a strong racial predilection, b) carries a grave prognosis, and c) arises from glabrous skin.  It is a clinical entity distinct from other extremity melanomas.  Surgical management with either wide excision or amputation is appropriate for the primary lesion.
Long-term experience with a totally implanted catheter system in cancer patients.  Long-term experience with totally implanted catheter systems (TICS) is limited.  We retrospectively evaluated the performance and long-term complications of TICS for intravenous infusion in cancer patients; 134 systems were implanted in 128 patients.  The median duration of implantation was 144 weeks with 49 systems implanted for more than one year.  Complications related to surgical factors included malposition of reservoir (2%), skin perforation or wound dehiscence (1.5%) and pneumothorax (less than 1%).  Complications not related to surgical factors included: drug extravasation (1.5%), mechanical malfunction (1.5%), vein thrombosis (less than 1%), clotting of the reservoir or catheter (2%), skin infection (1.5%), and sepsis (less than 1%).  The total complication rate was 13%.  Most complications resolved spontaneously or with medical treatment and only 6 patients (4.6%) required re-implantation of a second system.  We conclude that with long-term usage of TICS, the complication rate remains low, making it a safe and viable alternative for patients requiring long-term intravenous therapy.
Cutaneous malignant melanoma in Rochester, Minnesota: trends in incidence and survivorship, 1950 through 1985   In Rochester, Minnesota, 107 incidence cases of cutaneous malignant melanoma (in 46 male and 61 female patients) were diagnosed during the years 1950 through 1985.  Overall crude incidence rates were 6.0 and 6.6 per 100,000 males and females, respectively.  Evaluation of trends in 9-year periods showed that the rates increased from 3.2 to 8.9 for males (P = 0.015) and from 4.4 to 11.7 for females (P less than 0.001).  Age-specific rates suggested that the highest incidence occurs in the age-groups 50 to 59 years and 70 years or older for males and 40 to 49 years and 70 years or older for females.  Lesions were most common in the head and neck area among males (P = 0.044) and on the lower extremities among females (P = 0.018).  The most frequent histologic type was superficial spreading melanoma (61%).  Five-year survival was diminished overall for patients with cutaneous malignant melanoma--0.72 in comparison with 0.88 expected for the general population.  Statistically significant risk factors for survival were depth of invasion of the lesion (Clark level), thickness of the lesion, histologic type, and age of the patient.
Diagnosis of corticotropin-producing bronchial carcinoid tumors causing Cushing's syndrome   Cushing's syndrome due to ectopic production of adrenocorticotropic hormone (corticotropin) has been recognized for many years.  Traditionally, clinicians have thought that most cases were due to lung carcinomas and that the clinical manifestations differed from those for pituitary-dependent Cushing's syndrome.  We report two cases of corticotropin-producing bronchial carcinoid tumors that were clinically and biochemically indistinguishable from pituitary-dependent Cushing's syndrome.  Review of the literature revealed that bronchial carcinoid tumors are the most common cause of Cushing's syndrome due to ectopic secretion of corticotropin.  On biochemical and anatomic studies, they are frequently indistinguishable from pituitary-dependent Cushing's syndrome and thus may be difficult to diagnose.  Inferior petrosal sinus sampling for corticotropin and computerized imaging of the chest may be the best aids in making the diagnosis.
Adult T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma in Brazil and its relation to HTLV-I   In a series of fourteen patients with adult T-cell lymphoma-leukaemia (ATLL) in Brazil the main features were lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, hypercalcaemia, and high leucocyte counts, with abnormal lymphoid cells which had irregular nuclei.  The series included the youngest patient with ATLL so far (18 months).  Analysis with monoclonal antibodies showed a mature T-cell phenotype (CD4+, CD8-).  Antibodies to HTLV-I and/or integration of HTLV-I proviral DNA were found in eleven patients.  In the other three HTLV-I DNA could not be demonstrated even by means of the polymerase chain reaction; they therefore had HTLV-I-negative ATLL.  This report of ATLL in Brazil corroborates serological reports that HTLV-I may be endemic in some parts of that country.  Follow-up studies are required to identify precisely the main route of transmission of HTLV-I in South America and the risk factors for the development of ATLL in carriers.
Local control of auricular, periauricular, and external canal cutaneous malignancies with Mohs surgery.  Three hundred ninety-seven patients with 407 cutaneous malignancies of the auricle, periauricular region, and cartilaginous external ear canal were reviewed.  Tumors were most commonly located in the preauricular and postauricular regions, followed by the helix, concha, antihelix, and ear canal.  All lesions were excised with Mohs microscopic control of margins.  For lesions requiring lateral temporal bone resection, an adaptation of fresh-tissue microscopic control was used to analyze deep and anterior margins suspected of harboring residual tumor.  Two-year minimum follow-up of 229 patients with periauricular and auricular tumors (N = 231 tumors) and 14 patients with cartilaginous ear canal tumors (N = 14 tumors) revealed recurrence rates of 6.9% and 14.3%, respectively.  Recurrences were most common in cases of large tumors (greater than 2.5 cm), basal cell carcinomas with morphea elements, and multiply recurrent lesions.  We conclude that Mohs surgery is comparatively effective, though not uniformly curative, and can be adapted to supplement excision of large tumors in these regions.
Clinical classification and staging for primary malignancies of the maxillary antrum.  A study of 51 patients with primary malignant maxillary sinus neoplasms was conducted.  None of the patients had neck nodes and/or metastases, and each had 5-year follow-up.  The tumors were staged according to the 1983 and 1988 American Joint Committee on Cancer staging systems for maxillary sinus cancers.  There were 13 early stage (T1, T2) and 38 advanced (T3, T4) tumors in both systems.  Cox regression analyses of survival curves showed increasingly worse prognoses for advanced tumors in both T-staging systems.  Further analyses showed a significant difference in survival between T3 and T4 in the 1988, but not in the 1983 system.  There were no significant differences in survival according to treatment modality or histological type of malignancy.  We conclude that the 1988 system prognosticates successfully for T-stage (1 to 4) and demonstrates significant improvement in detecting T3 versus T4 differences compared to the 1983 system.  The 1988 system applies equally for epidermoid cancer and other malignancies of the antrum.
Somatostatin-receptor imaging in the localization of endocrine tumors   BACKGROUND AND METHODS.  A number of different tumors have receptors for somatostatin.  We evaluated the efficacy of scanning with 123I-labeled Tyr3-octreotide, a somatostatin analogue, for tumor localization in 42 patients with carcinoid tumors, pancreatic endocrine tumors, or paragangliomas.  We then evaluated the response to octreotide therapy in some of these patients.  RESULTS.  Primary tumors or metastases, often previously unrecognized, were visualized in 12 of 13 patients with carcinoid tumors and in 7 of 9 patients with pancreatic endocrine tumors.  The endocrine symptoms of these patients responded well to therapy with octreotide.  Among 20 patients with paragangliomas, 8 of whom had more than one tumor, 10 temporal (tympanic or jugular), 9 carotid, and 10 vagal tumors could be visualized.  One small tympanic tumor and one small carotid tumor were not seen on the scan.  CONCLUSIONS.  The 123I-labeled Tyr3-octreotide scanning technique is a rapid and safe procedure for the visualization of some tumors with somatostatin receptors.  A positive scan may predict the ability of octreotide therapy to control symptoms of hormonal hypersecretion.
Intraoperative radioimmunodetection of ovarian cancer using monoclonal antibody B72.3 and a portable gamma-detecting probe.  To assess the value of radioimmunoguided surgery in the intraoperative detection of ovarian cancer, we used monoclonal antibody B72.3, radiolabeled with 125I, and a hand-held gamma-detecting probe in 13 women with ovarian cancer undergoing exploratory laparotomy.  B72.3, which recognizes a tumor-associated glycoprotein, TAG 72, was injected 12-29 days preoperatively (intraperitoneally in four cases, intravenously in nine, and by both routes in one).  Intraoperatively, the abdomen was surveyed with the probe and probe counts were correlated with biopsies and excised specimens studied by routine histologic stains.  Probe counts were positive in four of seven evaluable patients with histologically confirmed disease.  In three of these four patients, the probe detected cancer in specimens interpreted as normal on frozen histologic sections.  The probe also identified microscopic cancer in the one patient who had no gross disease.  The specificity of the probe was 70%.  Preoperative computed tomography was normal in all patients, including those with tumors as large as 3 cm.  This pilot study shows the ability of radioimmunoguided surgery to detect occult ovarian cancer.
Prognostic factors for outcome of and survival after second-look laparotomy in patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma.  In ovarian cancer stages IIB-IV, pre-treatment variables and variables obtained intraoperatively at second-look laparotomy were investigated for their prognostic influence on the outcome of 109 patients and survival after second-look laparotomy in 131 patients.  The subjects came from a randomized trial of sequential versus alternating combination chemotherapy.  The overall median survival after second-look laparotomy was 62 months.  Logistic regression analysis identified stage and hysterectomy plus bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and omentectomy as significant prognostic covariates for second-look laparotomy outcome.  Based on a Cox multivariate stepwise analysis, independent prognostic factors for survival after second-look laparotomy were secondary residual tumor size, pre-treatment histologic differentiation grade, and performance status.  A high differentiation grade and a good performance status at the start of therapy thus still had a prolonging effect on survival after second-look laparotomy.  The prognostic power of these pre-treatment variables was increased substantially by the addition of the secondary residual tumor size variable.  The 3-year survival rate after second-look laparotomy for high- and low-risk patients was 15 and 87%, respectively.  Second-look laparotomy thus provides prognostic information in patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma, but the benefit in terms of survival is still unclear.
Ovarian metastases are rare in stage I adenocarcinoma of the cervix.  Over a 32-year period at the University of California, Los Angeles Medical Center, all cases of adenocarcinoma and adenosquamous carcinoma of the uterine cervix were reviewed to determine the incidence of ovarian metastases in stage I disease.  One of 25 patients (4.0%) who underwent an exploratory laparotomy and radical hysterectomy had a microscopic ovarian metastasis.  A literature review identified nine additional patients who had ovarian metastases and stage I adenocarcinoma of the cervix.  Including our series, the overall reported rate of ovarian metastases is 1.8%.  All ten patients had at least one of the following additional characteristics: They were postmenopausal, they had adnexal pathology, or they had positive pelvic lymph nodes.  Thus, ovarian preservation is warranted in premenopausal patients who do not have ovarian pathology or evidence of other metastatic disease at surgery.  Bilateral oophorectomy may be performed if frozen-section examination of enlarged or suspicious nodes documents metastases.  If the ovaries are left in the pelvis at the completion of the surgical procedure and microscopic spread to other pelvic tissues is documented, pelvic irradiation can be administered.
The fallacy of the screening interval for cervical smears.  One hundred seventy-four women with invasive cervical carcinoma were interviewed about their cervical smear histories to assess the accuracy of self-reporting and to relate the smear history with patient and tumor characteristics.  Patients reported significantly more frequent, more recent, and more normal smears than were documented in medical records.  The interval between onset of cancer symptoms and previous smear correlated directly with advanced stage.  Sixteen women with normal smears within 36 months had significantly more advanced cancers than did 25 women with recent abnormal smears.  Women with recent normal and abnormal smears had similar sociodemographic and behavioral characteristics.  Because of inaccuracies in patients' self-reported smear histories and cancers developing in women with recent normal smears, we conclude that a specific screening interval should not be relied upon.
Cold-knife and laser conization for cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.  In a 5-year study, 425 women had conization performed for cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) I, II or III.  Conization was performed only in cases of positive endocervical curettage or when colposcopy was inconclusive.  In all other cases, local destruction was the operation of choice.  In the early years of the study, conization was done by the cold-knife method (N = 201), whereas CO2 laser was used in the latter part of the study (N = 224).  Success and complication rates were the same for the two methods.  Abnormal cytology after conization was found in a total of 53 cases (12.5%), but a histologic confirmation of residual or recurrent CIN was made in only 27 women (6.4%).  This corresponds to a success rate of 92% after cold-knife and 95% after laser conization.  The CIN grading of the residual or recurrent CIN was similar to or less than the CIN diagnosis of the cone.  Because our success rate was comparable to that of other series with much less strict referral criteria, our policy seems adequate.
Primary invasive carcinoma of the vagina.  A retrospective review was conducted of 53 women with invasive carcinoma of the vagina and without documented exposure to diethylstilbestrol who were seen at the University of California Irvine Medical Center, Long Beach Memorial Medical Center, and Saddleback Memorial Medical Center from 1976-1988.  Forty-seven (89%) had squamous cell carcinoma and six (11%) adenocarcinoma.  Thirty-seven (70%) were treated with whole-pelvis irradiation and brachytherapy, nine with surgery alone, and the other seven with a combination of treatments.  The crude and corrected 2-year survival rates for the entire group were 47 and 69%, respectively.  Those with previous pelvic surgery were more likely to develop serious treatment-related complications.  There was a statistically significant correlation between previous hysterectomy and the diagnosis of primary invasive carcinoma of the vagina after the onset of symptoms.  Women diagnosed during routine examination, before symptom onset, tended to have a survival advantage.  All women, including those who have had hysterectomy, should be counseled to continue gynecologic cancer surveillance regardless of age.
Carbon dioxide laser vaporization of diaphragmatic metastases for cytoreduction of ovarian epithelial cancer.  Three patients with International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics state IIIC ovarian adenocarcinoma underwent CO2 laser vaporization of large-volume (5-6 cm) and miliary right hemidiaphragmatic metastases at the conclusion of standard debulking surgery to effect optimal cytoreduction.  Destruction of diaphragmatic metastases was accomplished rapidly with no added morbidity or blood loss.  The hand-held CO2 laser is a useful modality for removal of isolated large- and small-volume diaphragmatic disease, particularly if only the peritoneum is involved, and avoids the morbidity that may accompany entry into the pleural space.
Detection, prevalence, and prognosis of asymptomatic carcinoma of the cervix.  Between 1979-1986, 82 of 407 patients (20%) treated for infiltrative carcinoma of the cervix were asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis.  Sixteen (20%) of these 82 patients had stage IA, 60 (73%) had stage IB, and six (7%) had stage IIA disease.  Asymptomatic patients represented 16 of 23 (70%) of stage IA, 60 of 196 (31%) of stage IB, and six of 77 (8%) of stage IIA.  In the Netherlands, population screening for cervical carcinoma is conducted on women aged 35-55 years.  To examine the prevalence of asymptomatic cervical carcinoma and the way in which it was detected in different age groups, we studied the patients referred to our department.  Among the patients younger than 35 years with cervical carcinoma, 20 of 70 (29%) were asymptomatic with disease detected by incidental screening, whereas eight of 177 (5%) in the group 55 years or older had been detected by incidental screening.  In the age category 35-55 years, 54 of 160 (34%) were asymptomatic.  Patients aged 35-55 years had undergone population screening or incidental screening.  In the patients 55 years or older, asymptomatic disease was significantly less prevalent than in younger patients.  Only one of the 66 asymptomatic patients in stage IB or higher suffered tumor recurrence.  Among symptomatic patients, 25 of 136 (18%) with stage IB and 17 of 71 (24%) with stage IIA had tumor recurrence.  Despite the favorable prognosis of patients with asymptomatic carcinoma, asymptomatic presentation could not be shown to be a significant prognostic factor, as were tumor diameter and lymph node status.
New findings in treatment of colon cancer.  Patients with colon cancer involving regional lymph nodes (stage C disease) have a 5-year survival rate of only 30% to 40%, and the majority die of recurrent disease.  Recent trials have shown increased survival rates with postoperative use of fluorouracil plus levamisole.  The authors discuss these findings and the implications on treatment recommendations for stage C colon cancer.
Cloning of the cDNA for human 12-lipoxygenase.  A full-length cDNA clone encoding 12-lipoxygenase (arachidonate:oxygen 12-oxidoreductase, EC 1.13.11.31) was isolated from a human platelet cDNA library by using a cDNA for human reticulocyte 15-lipoxygenase as probe for the initial screening.  The cDNA had an open reading frame encoding 662 amino acid residues with a calculated molecular weight of 75,590.  Three independent clones revealed minor heterogeneities in their DNA sequences.  Thus, in three positions of the deduced amino acid sequence, there is a choice between two different amino acids.  The deduced sequence from the clone plT3 showed 65% identity with human reticulocyte 15-lipoxygenase and 42% identity with human leukocyte 5-lipoxygenase.  The 12-lipoxygenase cDNA recognized a 3.0-kilobase mRNA species in platelets and human erythroleukemia cells (HEL cells).  Phorbol 12-tetradecanoyl 13-acetate induced megakaryocytic differentiation of HEL cells and 12-lipoxygenase activity and increased mRNA for 12-lipoxygenase.  The identity of the cloned 12-lipoxygenase was assured by expression in a mammalian cell line (COS cells).  Human platelet 12-lipoxygenase has been difficult to purify to homogeneity.  The cloning of this cDNA will increase the possibilities to elucidate the structure and function of this enzyme.
p53 mutations in colorectal cancer.  Immunohistological staining of primary colorectal carcinomas with antibodies specific to p53 demonstrated gross overexpression of the protein in approximately 50% of the malignant tumors examined.  Benign adenomas were all negative for p53 overexpression.  To determine the molecular basis for this overexpression we examined p53 protein expression in 10 colorectal cancer cell lines.  Six of the cell lines expressed high levels of p53 in ELISA, cell-staining, and immunoprecipitation studies.  Direct sequencing and chemical-mismatch-cleavage analysis of p53 cDNA by using the polymerase chain reaction in these cell lines showed that all cell lines that expressed high levels of p53 were synthesizing mRNAs that encoded mutant p53 proteins.  In two of those four cell lines where p53 expression was lower, point mutations were still detected.  Thus, we conclude that overexpression of p53 is synonymous with mutation, but some mutations would not be detected by a simple immunohistochemical analysis.  Mutation of the p53 gene is one of the commonest genetic changes in the development of human colorectal cancer.
Chemical carcinogenesis: too many rodent carcinogens.  The administration of chemicals at the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) in standard animal cancer tests is postulated to increase cell division (mitogenesis), which in turn increases rates of mutagenesis and thus carcinogenesis.  The animal data are consistent with this mechanism, because a high proportion--about half--of all chemicals tested (whether natural or synthetic) are indeed rodent carcinogens.  We conclude that at the low doses of most human exposures, where cell killing does not occur, the hazards to humans of rodent carcinogens may be much lower than is commonly assumed.
Gd-HP-DO3A in clinical MR imaging of the brain.  As part of a phase II clinical trial, 14 patients with presumed intracranial neoplastic disease underwent magnetic resonance (MR) imaging before and after intravenous injection of gadolinium 1,4,7-tris(carboxymethyl)-10-(2'-hydroxypropyl)-1,4,7,10-tetraazacycl ododecane (HP-DO3A).  This neutral (nonionic) gadolinium chelate has lower osmolality, when formulated at equimolar concentrations, and superior in vitro stability compared with gadopentetate dimeglumine.  The safety profile of Gd-HP-DO3A permitted administration of doses up to 0.3 mmol/kg, three times the dose of gadopentetate dimeglumine approved by the U.S.  Food and Drug Administration.  In this limited clinical trial, Gd-HP-DO3A proved to be a safe and efficacious agent in MR imaging of the head.  The only change documented in patient monitoring was that of slight skin redness at the injection site immediately after administration in two patients.  No statistically significant changes due to administration of the agent were noted in laboratory evaluations.  These results differ from those obtained with gadopentetate, which induces a transient rise in serum iron and bilirubin levels in up to 26% of patients.  Administration of higher doses of Gd-HP-DO3A, either 0.2 or 0.3 mmol/kg, appeared to provide improved enhancement.  No decrease in efficacy at these high doses was noted.
Primary Ewing sarcoma: follow-up with Ga-67 scintigraphy.  While avid accumulation of gallium-67 citrate and technetium-99m methylene diphosphonate (MDP) occurs initially in most cases of primary Ewing sarcoma, uptake after therapy is less well defined.  Thirty patients with Ewing sarcoma who underwent Ga-67 and bone scintigraphy at diagnosis, at completion of therapy, and at relapse from 1978 to 1988 were evaluated.  All 30 patients showed less primary site Ga-67 activity following therapy.  Twenty-three of 28 patients who underwent corresponding bone scintigraphy showed less uptake, but residual activity was usually more intense than with Ga-67.  Avid reaccumulation of Ga-67 occurred in four of five patients with primary site relapse, while patients who underwent bone scintigraphy showed less change.  It was concluded that a greater decrease in Ga-67 than in Tc-99m MDP uptake often occurs in patients successfully treated for primary Ewing sarcoma.  Information obtained at Ga-67 scintigraphy is most likely to be helpful if results of bone scintigraphy remain abnormal or if occult relapse is suspected.
Endorectal ultrasonographic staging of rectal carcinoma.  Endorectal ultrasonography is a valuable imaging method for examination of the rectum and perirectal tissues.  We assessed 50 patients with known rectal carcinoma prospectively by using a 7.0-MHz endorectal transducer to determine the depth of invasion of the rectal wall by tumor and the presence of lymphadenopathy.  Tumors were staged by using the Astler-Coller modification of the Dukes staging system, and the results were compared with histologic staging of the surgical specimen.  Ultrasonography had an accuracy of 80%, a sensitivity of 92%, and a specificity of 76% for detection of invasion of the perirectal fat.  Ultrasonography was sensitive in the detection of perirectal lymphadenopathy but was not specific in distinguishing benign from malignant nodes.
Invasive lobular carcinoma: mammographic findings in a 10-year experience   From January 1, 1976 to December 30, 1985, 1,966 cases of breast carcinoma were diagnosed and treated at Malmo General Hospital, Malmo, Sweden.  Of these cases, 185 (9.4%) involved invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC).  Mammography in 137 cases demonstrated the following findings: spiculated opacity (53%), architectural distortion (16%), poorly defined opacity (7%), normal or benign findings (16%), and parenchymal asymmetry (4%).  Radiographic definition of the ILC lesion varied greatly with projection: The craniocaudal view demonstrated significant findings more frequently than either the oblique or lateral views.  Secondary radiographic findings were present in 31%, microcalcifications were rare, and physical findings were present in 89%.  Because of its diffuse growth pattern and tendency to form lesions with opacity equal to or less than that of the parenchyma, ILC can be extremely difficult to detect mammographically.  Therefore, the radiologist must be alert for subtle mammographic signs of malignancy and highly suspicious of any abnormal physical findings regardless of the mammographic appearance.
Mammographic follow-up of low-suspicion lesions: compliance rate and diagnostic yield.  All recommendations for mammographic follow-up of low-suspicion lesions seen at mammography during a 6-month period were reviewed to establish compliance rate and eventual outcome.  One hundred forty-four of 2,650 mammograms (5%) showed minimal abnormalities that warranted short-term and periodic mammographic follow-up.  Rates of compliance at 4 months and at 1, 2, and 3 years were 88%, 71%, 60%, and 47%, respectively.  Progressive mammographic change was found in 10 patients, only one of whom had a carcinoma.  It was concluded that mammographic follow-up of low-suspicion lesions is a reasonable alternative to surgical biopsy, although patient compliance remains a significant problem.
Insulinomas: localization with selective intraarterial injection of calcium.  To facilitate the noninvasive preoperative localization of islet cell tumors less than 15 mm in diameter, the authors examined the use of calcium as an insulin secretagogue in an arterial stimulation venous sampling (ASVS) technique.  In four patients with episodic hypoglycemia, calcium gluconate (0.01-0.025 mEq Ca2+/kg) was injected directly into branches of the celiac plexus (gastroduodenal, splenic, and hepatic arteries) and the superior mesenteric artery.  In all patients, serum levels of insulin rose abruptly in blood samples taken from the right hepatic vein 30 and 60 seconds after the infusion of calcium into the artery supplying the tumor; injection into an artery not supplying the tumor did not result in a similar rise.  Accurate localization of the insulinomas was verified at surgery in three patients.  In the fourth patient, who did not undergo surgery, arteriographic results were positive for insulinoma at the predicted site.  On the basis of these results, the authors believe noninvasive ASVS may replace invasive portal venous sampling as the most effective method for the localization of occult insulinomas.
Selective catheterization of the inferior petrosal sinuses: new catheter design.  Catheters for selective catheterization of the right and left inferior petrosal sinuses have been developed to replace the complex tip-deflector catheter-guide-wire system currently used.  The new catheters are easily formed from commonly available straight catheters with the use of steam.  They have been successfully tested in 22 patients; the only complications were minor groin hematomas.
Petrosal sinus sampling: technique and rationale.  Bilateral simultaneous sampling of the inferior petrosal sinuses is an extremely sensitive, specific, and accurate test for diagnosing Cushing disease and distinguishing between that entity and the ectopic ACTH syndrome.  It is also valuable for lateralizing small hormone-producing adenomas within the pituitary gland.  The inferior petrosal sinuses connect the cavernous sinuses with the ipsilateral internal jugular veins.  The anatomy of the anastomoses between the inferior petrosal sinus, the internal jugular vein, and the venous plexuses at the base of the skull varies, but it is almost always possible to catheterize the inferior petrosal sinus.  In addition, variations in size and anatomy are often present between the two inferior petrosal sinuses in a patient.  Advance preparation is required for petrosal sinus sampling.  Teamwork is a critical element, and each member of the staff should know what he or she will be doing during the procedure.  The samples must be properly labeled, processed, and stored.  Specific needles, guide wires, and catheters are recommended for this procedure.  The procedure is performed with specific attention to the three areas of potential technical difficulty: catheterization of the common femoral veins, crossing the valve at the base of the left internal jugular vein, and selective catheterization of the inferior petrosal sinuses.  There are specific methods for dealing with each of these areas.  The sine qua non of correct catheter position in the inferior petrosal sinus is demonstration of reflux of contrast material into the ipsilateral cavernous sinus.  Images must always be obtained to document correct catheter position.  Special attention must be paid to two points to prevent potential complications: The patient must be given an adequate dose of heparin, and injection of contrast material into the inferior petrosal sinuses and surrounding veins must be done gently and carefully.  When the procedure is performed as outlined, both inferior petrosal sinuses can be catheterized in more than 98% of patients.  The complication rate is low, and the theoretical risk of major morbidity or death is less than 1% (neither has yet occurred, to our knowledge).  The most common complication is groin hematoma.
Spindle and epithelioid cell nevus (Spitz nevus). Natural history following biopsy.  A clinical follow-up study of 49 cases of spindle and epithelioid cell nevus is presented to address the question about the potential for local recurrence.  Only 19 (39%) of the 49 lesions were initially excised en toto, and the remainder (30 cases) had positive margins; six of the latter spindle and epithelioid cell nevi were reexcised, and no evidence of a residual nevus was found in five of the six cases.  There were no recurrences in the 49 patients during an average follow-up period of 5.0 years (range, 1 to 10 years).  The rarity of recurrent spindle and epithelioid cell nevus would justify a conservative approach to management, with clinical follow-up alone recommended after a subtotal excision, when the pathologic diagnosis is unequivocal.
Occupational sunlight exposure and melanoma in the U.S. Navy.  Melanoma is the second most common cancer, after testicular cancer, in males in the U.S.  Navy.  A wide range of occupations with varying exposures to sunlight and other possible etiologic agents are present in the Navy.  Person-years at risk and cases of malignant melanoma were ascertained using computerized service history and inpatient hospitalization files maintained at the Naval Health Research Center.  A total of 176 confirmed cases of melanoma were identified in active-duty white male enlisted Navy personnel during 1974-1984.  Risk of melanoma was determined for individual occupations and for occupations grouped by review of job descriptions into three categories of sunlight exposure: (1) indoor, (2) outdoor, or (3) indoor and outdoor.  Compared with the U.S.  civilian population, personnel in indoor occupations had a higher age-adjusted incidence rate of melanoma, i.e., 10.6 per 100,000 (p = .06).  Persons who worked in occupations that required spending time both indoors and outdoors had the lowest rate, i.e., 7.0 per 100,000 (p = .06).  Incidence rates of melanoma were higher on the trunk than on the more commonly sunlight-exposed head and arms.  Two single occupations were found to have elevated rates of melanoma: (1) aircrew survival equipmentman, SIR = 6.8 (p less than .05); and (2) engineman, SIR = 2.8 (p less than .05).  However, there were no cases of melanoma or no excess risk in occupations with similar job descriptions.  Findings on the anatomical site of melanoma from this study suggest a protective role for brief, regular exposure to sunlight and fit with recent laboratory studies that have shown vitamin D to suppress growth of malignant melanoma cells in tissue culture.  A mechanism is proposed in which vitamin D inhibits previously initiated melanomas from becoming clinically apparent.
Control of interleukin-1 beta expression by protein kinase C and cyclic adenosine monophosphate in myeloid leukemia cells.  We have examined the signal transduction pathways leading to the expression of the interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta) gene in human myeloid leukemia cells lines.  Two cell lines representing different stages of differentiation were used (HL-60, promyelocytic, and THP-1, mature monocytic).  In accordance with previous studies, it was observed that a protein kinase C (PKC) activator, phorbol myristate acetate (PMA), was a sufficient stimulus for induction of the IL-1 beta messenger RNA (mRNA) expression and IL-1 beta protein production in both of these cell lines.  A structural analog of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (dbcAMP) or agents elevating the endogenous cAMP levels (prostaglandin E2, forskolin) were not alone able to induce IL-1 beta expression, but they strongly enhanced the PMA-induced IL-1 beta production and IL-1 beta mRNA accumulation.  Nuclear run off analysis showed that this elevation in IL-1 beta mRNA levels was due to an increased rate of transcription.  If dbcAMP was added 6 hours before PMA to the cultures, no enhancement in the IL-1 beta production was seen, implying that for this enhancing effect both of these signals must be present simultaneously.  PKC inhibitor, H7, also blocked effectively the PMA plus dbcAMP induced IL-1 beta production, while the protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor, HA1004, had no effect, suggesting that PKA activation is not involved in the mechanism of action of cAMP in this case.  Collectively, the present findings show that cAMP-dependent signals can have a positive regulatory effect on the PKC-dependent activation of the IL-1 beta gene in cells derived from different stages of myeloid differentiation.
Potentiation of the erythropoietin response by dimethyl sulfoxide priming of erythroleukemia cells: evidence for interaction of two signaling pathways.  Erythropoietin (Epo) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) are believed to induce the differentiation of transformed erythroid cells by different signal transduction pathways.  We have now obtained evidence for the interaction of these pathways.  We used a Rauscher murine erythroleukemia cell line with a relatively low (8% to 10%) hemoglobinization response to Epo alone.  Pretreatment of these cells for 1 day with DMSO followed by its removal and the addition of Epo resulted in a marked enhancement of the Epo specific hemoglobinization.  We have designated this effect "DMSO priming." This priming effect of DMSO on the Epo response was both time-dependent and DMSO concentration-dependent.  DMSO priming potentiated the Epo response in three ways.  Firstly, DMSO priming increased the total number of Epo responsive cells from 8% to 10% to 40% to 60%.  Secondly, DMSO priming reduced the time required to reach the optimal Epo-induced response from 4 days to 2 days.  Thirdly, the Epo dose-response curve was left-shifted approximately 20-fold.  DMSO priming was also associated with a marked increase in Epo receptor density characterized by an apparently new receptor population and by the appearance of positive cooperativity between receptors.  Our results suggest that the DMSO priming effect is due to potentiation of the Epo signaling pathway, thus resulting in a much more rapid and dramatic Epo-induced hemoglobinization response.
In vitro drug sensitivity of cells from children with leukemia using the MTT assay with improved culture conditions.  The knowledge about drug resistance in childhood leukemias and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in general is limited.  This is because of the lack of a suitable in vitro drug sensitivity assay, which is in part due to low in vitro ALL cell survival.  We recently adapted the highly efficient 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay to test cells from ALL patients and showed that its results were comparable with those of the DiSC assay, up to now the most valid but laborious assay.  In this study, in vitro drug sensitivity was assessed in cells from 82 children with leukemia, 79 of whom had ALL, with the MTT assay.  Dose response curves were obtained for 6-mercaptopurine, 6-thioguanine (6-TG), prednisolone (Pred), daunorubicin (DNR), vincristine (VCR), cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C), L-asparaginase (L-Asp), mafosfamide, and mustine.  A cytotoxic effect of methotrexate could be detected in only a few cases.  Large interindividual differences in drug sensitivity were detected.  Compared with leukemia cells from newly diagnosed patients, leukemia cells from relapsed patients were significantly more in vitro resistant to 6-TG, Pred, Ara-C, mafosfamide and mustine but not to DNR, VCR, and L-Asp.  Improvements of culture medium and methods to increase MTT reduction were studied.  From 10 components tested, addition of insulin and bovine serum albumin to serum-containing medium improved ALL cell survival.  Addition of succinate did not increase the amount of MTT reduction.  We conclude that the in vitro MTT assay highly facilitates large-scale studies on drug resistance of ALL patients that can lead to rational improvements in existing treatment protocols.
Analysis of interferon-inducible genes in cells of chronic myeloid leukemia patients responsive or resistant to an interferon-alpha treatment.  Recombinant human interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) can induce a hematologic remission in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia.  However, some patients are resistant and others develop late resistance to the IFN-alpha treatment.  To understand the molecular mechanism of this resistance, we have analyzed the expression of 10 IFN-inducible genes in the cells of three resistant patients, two responsive patients, and six healthy controls.  Northern blot hybridizations showed that all the genes were induced in in vitro IFN-alpha treated peripheral blood cells of the patients and healthy controls.  These genes were also inducible in peripheral blood and bone marrow cells of two out of two resistant patients administered an injection of IFN-alpha.  We conclude that the resistance to the IFN-alpha treatment of the chronic myeloid leukemia patients we studied is not due to (1) the absence of induction of any of the 10 IFN-inducible genes we studied, including the low-molecular-weight 2'-5'oligoadenylate synthetase; (2) the presence of an antagonist of IFN-alpha in the peripheral blood or bone marrow cells; and (3) the presence of neutralizing anti-IFN-alpha antibodies.
Serum erythropoietin levels in patients receiving intensive chemotherapy and radiotherapy.  To investigate the potential role of recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEpo) in patients receiving intensive cytotoxic therapy, we measured the endogenous levels of Epo in 31 patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation (BMT).  Seventeen patients underwent allogeneic BMT and 14 underwent autologous BMT.  On average, 10 +/- 4 units of red blood cells (RBCs) were transfused per patient.  The mean RBC transfusion requirement of the autologous BMT patients was significantly greater than that of the allogeneic recipients (12 +/- 3 v 8 +/- 4, P less than .01), although both groups were maintained at comparable hematocrits.  Epo levels were measured by radioimmunoassay (RIA).  For each patient, baseline serum Epo levels were determined at time of admission to the hospital.  Subsequent samples were collected within 24 hours of completing chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy, and on days 7, 14, and 28, after BMT.  Hematocrits (Hcts) were measured daily.  All patients had an initial serum creatinine less than or equal to 1.5 mg/dL.  Despite considerable differences in absolute Epo levels among individuals, a characteristic pattern was observed.  Following admission to the hospital and initiation of cytotoxic therapy, the average Hct decreased and the average Epo level initially increased.  The mean serum Epo levels peaked on day 7 post-BMT (284 +/- 190 mU/mL) and fell steadily thereafter.  While the average Hcts on day 7 and on day 28 post-BMT were not significantly different (28 +/- 4.6% v 29 +/- 3.3%, respectively), the average serum Epo levels decreased fourfold (P less than .01) during this same period.  Moreover, day 28 post-BMT mean Epo levels were inappropriately low (P less than .05) when compared with a reference population with bone marrow failure and normal controls who had not received cytotoxic therapy.  We conclude that the endogenous Epo response appears to be blunted during the 3 to 4 weeks immediately post-BMT.  Therefore, clinical trials assessing the efficacy of the administration of rhEpo in the treatment of anemias associated with cytotoxic therapy are warranted.
Efficacy of interferons on bowenoid papulosis and other precancerous lesions.  Preliminary results of an open randomized trial of recombinant interferon gamma in patients suffering from bowenoid papulosis are described.  Recombinant interferon gamma was given subcutaneously to 12 patients at a daily dose of 4 X 10(6) I.U.  by injection.  Four patients each were assigned to one of three treatment groups consisting of continuous therapy (group A) with three subcutaneous injections per week for 13 weeks; intermittent block therapy (group B) with four six-week cycles consisting of five injections on days 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 of each cycle; and intermittent single-dose therapy (group C) with six four-week cycles consisting of only one subcutaneous injection on day one of each cycle.  At the twenty-sixth week after onset of therapy, complete responses were seen in three of four patients of treatment group A, whereas in the treatment groups B and C only one patient, respectively, responded partially.  These results suggest that in contrast to condylomata acuminata bowenoid papulosis lesions respond better to continuous than to intermittent interferon gamma injections.
Non-AIDS-associated Kaposi's sarcoma (classical and endemic African types): treatment with low doses of recombinant interferon-alpha.  In the treatment of the classical and endemic African forms of Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), radiation therapy and chemotherapy have been widely used with varying degrees of success and morbidity.  We here report our preliminary experiences with low doses of recombinant interferon alfa-2b (rIFN alpha-2b) in the treatment of these types of KS, non-linked to the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).  Ten consecutive patients (eight patients with classical and two with endemic KS) with a median age of 62 years were treated long-term with 5 X 10(6) units of rIFN alpha-2b (Introna) given subcutaneously three times weekly for at least 6 months.  Of the 10 patients, six presented with cutaneous disease only, and four had additional visceral involvement.  After 6 months of treatment, seven of the 10 patients had a major response of the cutaneous lesions, and three patients showed stable skin diseases.  Of the four patients with additional visceral disease, one patient showed a complete regression of an intramyocardial tumor involving the right atrium and ventricle, whereas in the three other patients stabilization of the visceral lesions with marked symptomatic improvement occurred.  On the whole, the long-term results over a median duration of 12 months (range, 7 to 30) are also satisfactory: IFN-alpha continued to control KS in all patients.  The treatment was generally well tolerated; no serious side effects were observed.  Our preliminary data suggest that low-dose rIFN alpha-2b regimens are effective in classical and endemic African KS.  However, further studies are needed to establish the exact role for IFN-alpha as alternative to radiation and chemotherapy.
Clinical evaluation of interferons in malignant melanoma.  The evaluation of interferons in the treatment of malignant melanoma has been mainly in the treatment of advanced disease using interferons as the sole agent or in combination with other agents.  Studies of the value of interferons as adjuvant therapy in high-risk primary melanoma patients are necessary, but no results have been published to date.  Human interferon alpha produces low response rates as a sole agent, but in combination with cimetidine, a 30% response rate has been achieved.  Recombinant alpha interferons give responses of 15%-20% in advanced melanomas, and combination with cimetidine does not enhance the response rate.  Recombinant alpha interferons have been used in combination with other interferons, cimetidine, monoclonal antibodies, and cytotoxics, with either no or small improvement in response rates.  DTIC with recombinant interferon alpha-2a has been shown to produce objective response rates of 26%, with low toxicity and maintenance of quality of life.  A randomized trial with DTIC as the sole agent, compared with combination treatment, is being conducted to determine the significance of this finding.
Long-term adjuvant therapy of high-risk malignant melanoma with interferon alpha 2b.  Fifty-three high-risk melanoma patients in stage I and 15 patients in stage II were treated after standard surgical intervention with adjuvant therapy with recombinant interferon alpha-2b (rIFN alpha 2b) therapy for a total period of 20 months.  Concomitant patients (stage I, n = 82; stage II, n = 33) with identical stages and prognostic factors without adjuvant therapy were used to evaluate the efficacy of rIFN alpha 2b therapy.  No difference in 5-year relapse incidence and overall survival rates could be detected.  However, it appears that patients of both stage I and stage II benefit from long-term adjuvant rIFN alpha 2b therapy, because during the treatment period (20 months), the incidence of relapses was lower in comparison to controls.  After stopping treatment the incidence of relapse is equal in treated and control groups.  According to the results of our study, we suggest using continuous low-dose rIFN alpha 2b therapy for adjuvant treatment of malignant melanoma.
Interferon alpha and etretinate combination treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.  Eleven patients suffering from cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides) were treated with recombinant interferon alpha-2A in combination (seven patients) or alone.  Two patients, one in combined treatment, went into clinical complete remission, and five experienced partial remission.  Two patients progressed during therapy, and two were nonevaluable because they stopped treatment early due to side effects.  Dosages of interferon were from 3 to 36 million units daily for 3 months, and thereafter 3 times weekly.  Etretinate (0.7 mg/kg) was given orally.  The study showed that recombinant interferon alpha-2A in combination with etretinate or alone can induce remission of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
Cytostatic and cytotoxic effects of recombinant tumor necrosis factor-alpha on sensitive human melanoma cells in vitro may result in selection of cells with enhanced markers of malignancy.  Monolayer cultures of the human melanoma cell lines StML-12, StML-11, StML-14 (third, respectively, twenty-fifth subculture), and SKMel-28 derived from specimens representing different stages of tumor progression were treated with 10-10,000 U/ml rTNF-alpha applied for 72 h.  The effects of rTNF-alpha on cell proliferation, DNA synthesis, cell viability, cloning efficiency, cell division, cell morphology, and the immunophenotype were studied in triplicate experiments.  The cell line StML-14(3) revealed a significantly dose-dependent reduction of growth due to both cytostatic and cytotoxic activities of rTNF-alpha as well as a decrease of CE.  Increased numbers of cells in prophase were observed 24 h after addition of r-TNF-alpha.  In addition, dislocation of chromosomes in the metaphase, formation of micronuclei, and dose-dependent increases of cells exhibiting micronuclei and the DNA amount per cell were detected at the end of treatment.  On the other hand, only a slight sensitivity to the anti-proliferative effect of rTNF-alpha was observed with StML-14(25) and SKMel-28, whereas StML-12 and StML-11 were significantly resistant.  The last four cell lines were serially subcultivated and presented common phenotypic patterns with more malignant characteristics than the cell line StML-14(3) before treatment.  Overall, rTNF-alpha enhanced the malignant immunophenotype of the cell lines tested.  It increased the expression of the "late" melanoma progression markers A.10.33 and A.1.43, and Ki67, and it decreased the expression of the "early" progression marker K.1.2.  The expression of HLA-I, HLA-DR, and ICAM-1 was also enhanced after rTNF-alpha treatment, whereas in contrast to other cytokines, rTNF-alpha did not induce the de novo expression of HLA-DR in HLA-DR-negative melanoma cell lines.  These findings indicate that rTNF-alpha induces cytostasis and decreases cell viability of certain rTNF-alpha-sensitive melanoma cells.  These effects may result in selection of rTNF-alpha-non-sensitive human melanoma cell populations with higher proliferation rates and a more aggressive immunophenotype in vitro.
High incidence of antibodies to HTLV-I tax in blood relatives of adult T cell leukemia patients.  Adult T cell leukemia (ATL) is caused by the human T cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I).  Although the mechanisms of the leukemogenic process are unknown, the tax gene may have a role in this process.  Because clustering occurs with HTLV-I and ATL, members of ATL families were examined for antibodies to the tax protein and compared with matched HTLV-I-positive blood donors.  To investigate the antibody response to this protein, a plasmid, pBHX-4, was constructed to express a recombinant tax protein (r-tax).  For ATL patients and their HTLV-I antibody-positive blood relatives, the rate of seroreactivity with the r-tax protein was 67.3% (35/52), compared with 51.6% (97/188) for HTLV-I antibody-positive control blood donors (P less than .05).  The difference between direct offspring of ATL patients and matched HTLV-I blood donors was even greater (84.2% [16/91] vs.  44.2% [42/95]; P less than .005).  Thus, tax antibody positivity in direct offspring of ATL patients may reflect differences in time or route of HTLV-I infection.  Alternatively, it might reflect genetic differences in host susceptibility or virus strain.
The fastigial pressor response. Case report.  A distinct vasomotor and cardioregulatory response first identified experimentally was elicited intraoperatively in a 6-year-old girl by local mechanical stimulation in the vicinity of the fastigial nucleus of the cerebellum.  These findings are discussed in the light of current experimental knowledge of the anatomy and physiology of the fastigial pressor response.
Correlates of survival and the Daumas-Duport grading system for astrocytomas.  In order to examine the correlation between prognosis and the histological features of nuclear atypia, mitosis, endothelial proliferation, and necrosis in supratentorial adult astrocytomas, the authors reviewed 251 such cases treated at the Massachusetts General Hospital between 1972 and 1980.  One point was given for the presence of each feature.  The total number of features was translated into a grade as follows: none of the four features = Grade 1 (one patient), one feature = Grade 2 (36 patients), two features = Grade 3 (33 patients), and three or four features = Grade 4 (181 patients).  The period of survival was significantly associated with grade, the presence or absence of each of the four histological features, patient's age, type of operation, radiation therapy, and extent of tumor (log rank, p less than 0.05).  The variables associated with grade were age (p less than 0.001) and radiation therapy (p less than 0.02).  After adjustment for these variables using a Cox proportional-hazards model, the difference in overall survival time between patients in Grades 2 and 3 was not statistically significant.  When comparable groups of patients were examined in terms of age or receipt of radiation therapy, the median survival times differed markedly.  Patients 50 years of age or less had a median survival time of 68 months (Grade 2 tumors), 29 months (Grade 3 tumors), and 13 months (Grade 4 tumors).  Patients over 50 years of age had a median survival time of 6 months (Grade 2 and 4 tumors) and 9 months (Grade 3 tumors).  Those patients who had received radiation therapy had a median survival time of 68 months (Grade 2 tumors), 21 months (Grade 3 tumors), and 11 months (Grade 4 tumors).  Those patients who did not receive radiation therapy had a median survival time of 1 month (Grade 2 tumors) and 2 months (Grade 3 and 4 tumors); over half of these patients died within 2 months of surgery.  This grading system, originally proposed by Daumas-Duport, et al., is simple, objective, and reproducible, and correlates well with survival times.  The authors recommend that astrocytomas be graded on a scale of 1 to 4, with Grade 1 reserved for the rare adult supratentorial astrocytoma with none of the four histological features.
Intratumoral oxygen pressure in malignant brain tumor.  Oxygen pressure (pO2) in brain tumors, pO2 in brain cortex surrounding the tumors, and PaO2 were measured simultaneously during total resection in 16 patients with previously untreated brain tumors in order to detect hypoxic regions within the tumors.  When the inhaled O2:N2O ratio was 1:3 under enflurane anesthesia, mean PaO2 was 109.2 +/- 5.8 mm Hg, a rather high value when compared with that obtained when air is inhaled under atmospheric pressure.  The simultaneously measured intratumoral pO2 and pO2 in brain cortex surrounding the tumor were 15.3 +/- 2.3 and 59.8 +/- 6.5 mm Hg, respectively.  Each intratumoral pO2 value was significantly lower than that of pO2 in brain cortex surrounding the tumor (mean less than 30 mm Hg, Wilcoxon signed rank test, p less than 0.005) and influenced the oxygen effects on radiation.  These results appear to confirm that there are hypoxic regions within human brain tumors.  A comparison between intratumoral pO2 and either the angiographic or contrast-enhanced computerized tomography scans of the tumor vasculature disclosed no correlation.
Photodynamic therapy of spontaneous cancers in felines, canines, and snakes with chloro-aluminum sulfonated phthalocyanine.  This is the first report on the photodynamic treatment with a second-generation sensitizer, chloro-aluminum sulfonated phthalocyanine (CASPc) of spontaneously arising tumors and on the photodynamic therapy (PDT) of snake neoplasms.  Each of 10 cats, 2 dogs, and 3 snakes presenting with a variety of tumor types (squamous cell carcinoma, mast cell malignant tumor, and mixed carcinoma/sarcoma) was given an intravenous injection of 1 mg of CASPc per kilogram body weight 48 hours prior to irradiation with 675-nm light.  Some larger tumors (greater than 1.5 cm deep) were surgically debulked prior to PDT.  No significant systemic toxicity or skin photosensitization was observed in any animal.  The tumor responses were comparable to those seen with conventional cryotherapy, hyperthermia, or surgery.  PDT with CASPc of these cases led to 67% (12 of 18) complete response, 22% (4 of 18) partial response, and 11% (2 of 18) no response (less than 50% reduction in tumor size).  Four cases could not be evaluated.  Since the overall tumor response to CASPc is very good, and the problem of skin photosensitivity is nonexistent, it is expected that using CASPc-PDT to eradicate human tumors would also yield comparable results.  Further studies with long-term follow-up are necessary to optimize the use of CASPc-PDT in veterinary and human medicine.
Increased expression of the laminin receptor in human colon cancer.  It has been proposed that among the various cell-surface proteins capable of interacting with laminin, the 67-kd high-affinity laminin receptor plays a crucial role during tumor invasion and metastasis.  In this study, the expression of laminin-receptor-precursor messenger RNA (mRNA) and 67-kd protein was analyzed in human colon adenocarcinoma.  In 22 of 23 patients with colon cancer, we found a 2- to 23-fold increase in levels of laminin-receptor-precursor mRNA in the cancer tissues compared with those in matched normal adjacent colonic mucosa.  In 10 of 11 cases studied, the level of 67-kd laminin receptor, detected by affinity-purified anti-laminin-receptor synthetic peptide antibodies on immunoblots of matched tumor and normal tissue extracts, was higher in the colon carcinoma tissue.  Immunodetection of laminin receptor in tissue sections using anti-laminin-receptor-peptide antibodies confirmed that the increased expression of laminin receptor was specifically associated with the cancer cells.  In a series of 72 paraffin sections of colon lesions, we observed a correlation between the expression of the laminin receptor and the Dukes' classification.  Our observations indicate that increased expression of laminin-receptor-precursor mRNA is associated with enhanced levels of the 67-kd laminin receptor as well as with the invasive phenotype of colon carcinoma.  Detection of this metastasis-associated gene product may be a valuable adjunct in the evaluation of human colon cancer.
Effect of prior cancer chemotherapy on human tumor-specific cytotoxicity in vitro in response to immunopotentiating biologic response modifiers.  Tumor-specific cytotoxicity was measured in fresh human biopsy specimens by a modification of the differential staining cytotoxicity assay.  ImuVert, a cytokine inducer derived from Serratia marcescens, which produces broad-spectrum activation of both macrophages and lymphocytes, was dramatically more effective when it was tested in tumors obtained from patients with previously treated, chemotherapy-responsive adenocarcinomas (breast and ovary) than when it was tested in tumors obtained from either previously untreated patients or previously treated patients with chemotherapy-refractory adenocarcinomas (colon, lung, pancreas, stomach, kidney, gallbladder, uterus, and prostate).  Similar findings, relating to prior chemotherapy treatment status, were obtained for tumor necrosis factor and interferon gamma, but not for interleukin-2 or interferon alpha.  On the basis of these findings and on other evidence in the literature, we speculate that response to chemotherapy produces massive release and processing of tumor antigens.  We further speculate that this response leads to a state in which the human immune system is primed (via in situ vaccination) to respond to exogenous macrophage-activation signals with potent, specific antitumor effects.
Comparisons of diet and biochemical characteristics of stool and urine between Chinese populations with low and high colorectal cancer rates.  In an investigation of the roles of diet and stool biochemistry in human colorectal carcinogenesis, 24-hour food, urine, and stool samples were collected from randomly selected participants from two populations with a fourfold difference in colorectal cancer risk: Chinese in Sha Giao, People's Republic of China (low risk), and Chinese-Americans of similar ages in San Francisco County, Calif, in the United States (high risk).  The findings supported the hypotheses that colorectal cancer risk is increased by the consumption of high-fat, high-protein, and low-carbohydrate diets and is associated with high levels of cholesterol in stool as well as increased daily outputs of 3-methyl-histidine and malonaldehyde in urine.  However, risk does not increase with low stool bulk and low total stool fibers.
Phase I trial of piritrexim capsules using prolonged, low-dose oral administration for the treatment of advanced malignancies.  A phase I trial of piritrexim was conducted by use of a prolonged, low-dose oral schedule.  A number of different regimens were tested, including daily dosing for 21 days followed by 7 days of no drug therapy; continuous dosing; and daily dosing for 5 of 7 days for 3 consecutive weeks followed by a week of rest.  Dose escalation was accomplished by increasing the dosing frequency from once a day to twice a day and then to three times a day and by increasing the number of days of administration.  Fifty-one patients with advanced cancer were entered in the study.  One hundred twenty-four (96%) of 129 courses were considered assessable.  Myelosuppression proved to be the dose-limiting toxic effect.  Other toxic effects included stomatitis, nausea and vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, skin rash, fatigue, and elevation of liver transaminase levels.  Antitumor activity was observed in patients with melanoma and bladder cancer, and disease stabilization occurred in those with sarcoma and pheochromocytoma.  The recommended dosing schedule for phase II clinical trials is 25 mg three times a day for 5 days for 3 consecutive weeks followed by 1 week of no drug therapy.
Hematoporphyrin photodynamic therapy: is there truly a future in head and neck oncology? Reflections on a 5-year experience.  Photodynamic therapy, which consists of the selective destruction of tumors using a combination of a photosensitizer administered systemically (dihematoporphyrin ether) and an argon dye-pumped laser, has provoked profound interest amongst oncologists and has particularly titillated head and neck oncologists with its potential.  Unfortunately, no multi-institutional trials for head and neck tumors have been introduced, and the literature is replete with anecdotal reports from individual researchers on the management of advanced cancers for palliation, superficial early cancers, and field cancerization of the mucosa ("condemned mucosa").  A personal 5-year experience with 41 head and neck cancers was reviewed, as was the current literature.  An attempt was made to place in perspective the true role and future direction of this technology.
Extended retrolabyrinthine transtentorial approach to petroclival lesions.  In this communication, an extension of the retrolabyrinthine approach that has permitted safe, effective access to the petrous tip and clivus is presented.  The basic technique involved complete mastoidectomy, preservation of the middle and inner ear structures, removal of the sigmoid and middle fossa plates, middle and posterior fossa craniotomies, ligation of the superior petrosal sinus, and division of the tentorium.  Nine cases that exemplified the versatility of this approach constituted the basis of this paper: 2 cholesteatomas, 2 basilar artery aneurysms, 2 chordomas, and 3 meningiomas.  The indications for, and complications of, this method have been discussed.
A novel metalloproteinase gene specifically expressed in stromal cells of breast carcinomas.  A gene has been identified that is expressed specifically in stromal cells surrounding invasive breast carcinomas.  On the basis of its sequence, the product of this gene, named stromelysin-3, is a new member of the family of metalloproteinase enzymes which degrade the extracellular matrix.  The suggestion is that stromelysin-3 is one of the stroma-derived factors that have long been postulated to play an important part in progression of epithelial malignancies.
Germ-line transmission of a mutated p53 gene in a cancer-prone family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome   Tumour suppressor genes, whose usual function seems to be controlling normal cell proliferation, have been implicated in many inherited and sporadic forms of malignancies Much evidence supports the concept of tumour formation by loss-of-function mutations in suppressor genes, as predicted by the two-hit model of Knudson and DeMars.  The suppressor gene, p53, is affected in such a manner by numerous mutations, which occur in a variety of human tumours.  These mutations usually represent the loss of one allele and the substitution of a single base in the other.  We have now analysed the p53 gene in a family affected by Li-Fraumeni syndrome, a rare autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by the occurrence of diverse mesenchymal and epithelial neoplasms at multiple sites.  In some instances the neoplasms seem to be related to exposure to carcinogens, including ionizing radiation.  The Li-Fraumeni family that we studied had noncancerous skin fibroblasts (NSF) with an unusual radiation-resistant phenotype.  DNA derived from the NSF cells of four family members, spanning two generations, had the same point mutation in codon 245 (GGC----GAC) of the p53 gene.  This mutation leads to substitution of aspartic acid for glycine in one of the regions identified as a frequent target of point mutations in p53.  The NSF cell lines with the mutation also retained the normal p53 allele.  This inherited p53 mutation may predispose the members of this family to increased susceptibility to cancer.
Intracerebral solitary plasmacytoma.  We report a rare occurrence of intraparenchymal plasmacytoma and review the literature.  The clonal nature of the neoplasm is demonstrated by immunohistochemical and molecular techniques.  The importance of the latter techniques in ruling out other pathological entities is stressed.
Mohs micrographic surgery.  Mohs micrographic surgery is a versatile technique for the treatment of nonmelanoma skin cancers, especially recurrent, invasive, or infiltrating basal cell carcinomas.  It provides unsurpassed cure rates by using 100% surgical margin control, and it achieves maximal preservation of normal tissue.  At the conclusion of tumor extirpation, the defect is ready for immediate reconstruction.  With better understanding of the Mohs micrographic surgery technique, it can be more effectively used as part of a coordinated multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of patients with difficult cutaneous and paracutaneous neoplasms.
Transhepatic portal vein catheterization for localization of insulinomas: a ten-year experience.  One of the most important factors in the management of insulinomas is the ability to localize the tumor accurately either before or during surgery.  We prospectively carried out transhepatic portal venous sampling (THPVS) for tumor localization in 35 of 40 patients with organic hyperinsulinism during a 10-year period.  In 32 patients who underwent THPVS and in whom a single tumor was subsequently identified surgically, the maximal insulin gradient was located in the vicinity of the tumor in 100% of cases.  Specific regionalization of the tumor on the basis of the site of the maximal insulin gradient to one of three regions (the tail, the body/neck region, and the head/uncinate region) gave a sensitivity of 81% and a specificity of 91%.  In contrast, the use of specific cutoff levels for the insulin gradient as a guide to the presence of a tumor in one of these three regions did not increase the accuracy, leading instead to a significant loss of sensitivity with no comparable increase in specificity.  There were no major complications from the procedure in any patient.  The initial use of computed tomographic/ultrasound scanning and selective angiography localized only 46% of tumors, whereas subsequent THPVS led to the accurate preoperative localization of 100% of all tumors submitted to surgery.  Although the surgeon would have identified 81% of the tumors correctly at operation, in 19% (n = 6) he would have failed.  Four tumors were in the uncinate and two were in the head.  It seems that in patients with proved or established organic hyperinsulinism, THPVS may continue to be of value, if only to regionalize the tumor, especially those in the pancreatic head and uncinate process so as to preclude noncurative operations on the body and tail of the pancreas.
Myogenic regulatory protein (MyoD1) expression in childhood solid tumors: diagnostic utility in rhabdomyosarcoma.  Transcripts for the muscle regulatory gene MyoD1 are expressed during normal skeletal muscle myogenesis and in rhabdomyosarcomas but not in other tissues or in soft-tissue sarcomas.  Here we report the distribution of MyoD1 protein, determined by reactivity with anti-MyoD1 polyclonal sera in normal tissues, rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines, and in a variety of pediatric solid tumors.  The distribution of MyoD1 protein was highly restricted in normal tissues and was detected only in fetal skeletal muscle and more faintly in adult skeletal muscle.  All six human rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines analyzed expressed MyoD1 mRNA transcripts as well as immunoreactive protein.  The immunohistochemical expression of MyoD1 protein was then examined in 49 surgical specimens from a variety of pediatric solid tumors.  Each of 16 rhabdomyosarcoma specimens was positive for MyoD1, including four that did not express the intermediate filament protein desmin.  Two of five specimens originally designated sarcoma type indeterminate (STI) and two of three specimens originally designated extraosseous Ewing's sarcoma (EOE) were positive for MyoD1, suggesting commitment to myogenic differentiation.  Three of eight Wilms' tumors, which also expressed desmin and had clearly evident myogenic elements, also were positive for MyoD1.  Tumors that failed to express MyoD1 protein included neuroblastoma, primitive neuroectodermal tumor, non-Hodgkins lymphoma, embryonal sarcoma of the liver, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, malignant rhabdoid tumor, and Ewing's sarcoma of the bone.  These results indicate that expression of MyoD1 protein is highly restricted in normal human tissues and that expression of this gene product in malignant tissue may be diagnostic for rhabdomyosarcoma.  Furthermore MyoD1 staining may be a valuable adjunct in the classification of pediatric soft-tissue sarcomas.
Vimentin expression appears to be associated with poor prognosis in node-negative ductal NOS breast carcinomas.  Vimentin expression in tumors from 83 node-negative and 112 node-positive patients with infiltrative ductal not otherwise specified (NOS) breast carcinomas has been compared with 5-year survival.  For node-negative, but not for node-positive patients, there was a significant inverse relation between vimentin expression and survival.  Five-year survival of node-negative patients with vimentin-positive tumors was significantly worse compared with vimentin-negative tumors (P less than 0.0001).  In the node-negative group, only 36% of patients with vimentin-positive tumors but 82% of patients with vimentin-negative tumors survived 5 years.  Tumors of all eight node-negative patients with ductal NOS cancer who died in the first 27 months expressed vimentin.  Multivariate analysis of the node-negative group showed a strong correlation of vimentin expression and overall survival, but weak and not significant correlation between histologic grade or size and overall survival at 5 years.  Thus vimentin expression seems to be a strong indicator of poor prognosis in node-negative ductal NOS breast carcinomas.
Study of neu-protein expression in mammary Paget's disease with and without underlying breast carcinoma and in extramammary Paget's disease.  Correlation between neu/c-erbB-2/Her-2 gene amplification and overexpression of the neu gene product has been reported in tumors of glandular origin, especially ductal breast carcinomas.  Formalin-fixed and dewaxed sections from 23 cases of mammary (MPD) and 9 cases of extramammary (EPD) Paget's disease were immunohistochemically stained by means of the monoclonal antibody 3B5 directed against an intracellular domain of the neu gene protein.  All MPDs exhibited a distinct membrane staining of tumor cells independent of the presence of ductal breast carcinomas found in 18 cases.  All these breast carcinomas also were positive for neu staining.  In contrast to MPD, all EPDs were negative.  Normal epidermis was always negative.  Northern blot analysis sustained the immunohistologic findings in that the presence of neu mRNA could be demonstrated in two of three cases with MPD.  Negativity in one case was due to dilution effects by nontumor cells.  Our results suggest that Paget cells of mammary and extramammary localization, although very similar phenotypically, derive from different genetic accidents.  Furthermore neu positivity in all MPDs and all underlying ductal carcinomas suggests common genetic alterations for both tumors.  However the finding of five neu protein-positive MPDs without associated ductal breast carcinomas may suggest a somewhat different transformation process.
Detection of HTLV-I proviral sequences in CD30-positive large cell cutaneous T-cell lymphomas.  To investigate the possibility that cutaneous T-cell lymphomas of large cell type may be associated with human T-cell leukemia/lymphoma virus type I infection in nonendemic regions, tissue samples from six cases of large cell cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and four cases of small cell cutaneous T-cell lymphoma were screened for the presence of integrated proviral human T-cell leukemia/lymphoma virus type I DNA.  Combined use of Southern blot hybridization and enzymatic DNA amplification revealed human T-cell leukemia/lymphoma virus type I-specific sequences in all cases of large cell cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and in none of the cases of small cell cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.  These results suggest that in nonendemic areas, a significant proportion of large cell cutaneous T-cell lymphoma cases are associated with human T-cell leukemia/lymphoma virus type I.
Immunodetection of the metastasis-associated laminin receptor in human breast cancer cells obtained by fine-needle aspiration biopsy.  Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the breast is a very useful technique for the evaluation of a suspect lesion before surgical removal.  Increased expression of the 67-kd laminin receptor has been associated with the metastatic phenotype of cancer cells, particularly in colon and breast cancers.  In this study, the expression of laminin receptor was evaluated using the immunoperoxidase technique in 81 breast aspirates (26 benign and 55 neoplastic lesions).  Cells obtained from benign samples exhibited a low level of laminin receptor antigen detected by affinity-purified antibody raised against a cDNA-derived laminin receptor peptide.  In contrast, 71% of smears obtained from malignant breast lesions contained cells that were strongly stained by the antibody.  Heterogeneous expression of the laminin receptor was noted in both breast aspirates and fixed tissue specimens.  These data suggest that the immunodetection of laminin receptor in cells obtained by fine-needle aspiration of breast lesions could be a valuable adjunct in the prognostic evaluation of breast lesions.
Proliferation markers Ki-67 and p105 in soft-tissue lesions. Correlation with DNA flow cytometric characteristics.  Frozen tissue immunoreactivity with Ki-67, a monoclonal antibody that recognizes a nuclear antigen in nonresting or proliferating cells, was compared to DNA flow cytometry results (from fresh tissue) in a diverse group of 60 soft-tissue lesions.  Both DNA index and Ki-67 score were independently reported to be associated with grade and prognosis in sarcomas, but no direct comparison of these two variables was made.  It was attempted to measure proliferative activity in fixed paraffin-embedded tissues immunohistochemically in a subset of lesions using an antibody to another nuclear proliferation antigen, p105.  Lesions were given a grade according to lesion category (reactive, 1; benign, 2; low-grade malignant, 3; and high-grade malignant, 4).  Ki-67 reactivity correlated relatively well with this grading system (r = 0.59); benign lesions usually exhibited a low Ki-67 score and malignant lesions usually but not always exhibited a high score.  For example, some malignant fibrous histiocytomas contained only rare positive cells.  Some disparity between Ki-67 score and grade and within histologic types indicates some independence from these features, a fact that may be important when correlation with prognosis is performed.  However Ki-67 did not correlate well with flow data such as percentage S phase (r = 0.30), percentage S + G2M phases (r = 0.37), or DNA index (r = 0.39).  This probably is due to the fact that Ki-67 also marks cells in the G1 phase, whereas these are excluded in flow data analyses.  Anti-p105 highlighted almost all nuclei in all cases tested, including fibromatosis, and did not correlate with Ki-67 score, histologic grade or DNA flow cytometric data.  Results with p105 could not be favorably affected by titration experiments.  It is reasonable to conclude that the Ki-67 score is a variable related to but independent of histologic grade, histologic type, and DNA flow values.  Whether it is prognostically important in human sarcomas, as has been suggested, awaits further clinicopathologic study.
Alternative splicing of endothelial cell fibronectin mRNA in the IIICS region. Functional significance.  Transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-beta 1) is thought to play a role in modulating vascular cell function in vivo.  In vitro, it decreases endothelial cell proliferation and migration.  We postulated that these biologic activities could be mediated through TGF-beta 1 modulation of specific gene expression.  Therefore we differentially screened a human umbilical vein endothelial cell cDNA library with cDNAs prepared from both untreated and TGF-beta 1-treated bovine aortic endothelial cells.  Using this technique, we isolated many TGF-beta 1-induced cDNA clones.  Sequence analysis of these cDNAs showed that many of them corresponded to alternatively spliced fibronectin mRNAs.  These fibronectin clones all contained the extradomain I (ED I) but three different forms of the type III connecting segment (IIICS).  These different fibronectin cDNAs were expressed in bacteria and the recombinant proteins used to study the effects of IIICS alternative splicing on cell attachment, spreading, and migration in bovine aortic endothelial and smooth muscle cells and B16F10 melanoma cells.  The results of these experiments show that attachment and spreading of bovine aortic endothelial and smooth muscle cells depend primarily on the presence of the Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser (RGDS) sequence in the recombinant fibronectin proteins.  However attachment and spreading of bovine aortic endothelial cells are modulated by alternative splicing in the IIICS region.  Specifically splicing of the IIICS region decreases spreading and increases migration rates of the endothelial cells.  On the contrary, using a cell line (B16F10 melanoma cells) that is known not to require the RGDS sequence for adhesion confirmed previous findings that B16F10 melanoma cells do not require the presence of the RGDS sequence for attachment and spreading.  Indeed B16F10 cells were able to attach and spread on two recombinant proteins that did not contain the RGDS sequence.  However attachment and spreading of B16F10 were dramatically inhibited when a 75-base pair DNA fragment was removed from the 5' end of the IIICS region.  These results suggest that various regions of the fibronectin molecule may be able to interact with different cell populations to promote cell attachment and spreading, and that alternative splicing may modulate this process.
A three-dimensional system for long-term culture of human colorectal adenomas.  Studies of the adenoma-carcinoma sequence in the colon and rectum have been limited by the paucity of experimental models of adenoma growth and progression.  Progress recently was reported in the development of monolayer culture systems.  The principal objective of this study was to develop a primary culture system for colorectal adenomas that would simulate three-dimensional in vivo growth.  We used a calcium alginate encapsulation technique that was previously described for established tumor cell lines.  Briefly, fresh resected specimens were washed, minced into small multicellular particles called microadenomas, and encapsulated in 1% calcium alginate pellets.  The pellets were maintained in minimum essential medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum at 37 degrees C in humidified atmosphere of 95% air, 5% CO2.  Ten of eleven adenomas, including six tubular, three tubulovillous, and one villous have been successfully cultured for 34 to 162 days.  Cell viability was confirmed histologically by light and electron microscopy.  The cells were characterized as epithelial by morphologic features and ultrastructural studies, which showed a high degree of cellular differentiation, including villous brush borders and many desmosomes.  Both tubular and villuslike structures have been observed in vitro, correlating in some cases with the histology of the parent adenoma.  Measurements of proliferative activity by [3H]thymidine autoradiography or immunohistochemical staining with the monoclonal antibody Ki-67 demonstrated growth fractions of 9% to 25%.  A simple, highly efficient primary culture system was developed for the long-term maintenance of adenomas that promotes three-dimensional growth patterns and growth rates analogous to those seen in vivo.  This model provides an opportunity to develop an experimental system for longitudinal studies of pathologic and molecular parameters in adenoma progression to carcinoma.
Chromatin structural analysis of the 5' end and contiguous flanking region of the myeloperoxidase gene.  Myeloperoxidase (MPO) synthesis is known to be associated with the promyelocyte stage of myeloid differentiation.  In particular the downregulation of MPO gene transcription is associated with myeloid cell maturation.  We examined the changes in the deoxyribonuclease I hypersensitive sites within the 5' end of the MPO gene and its 5' flanking region during dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)-induced differentiation of HL-60 cells to determine the changes in chromatin structure that accompany this process.  The locations of hypersensitive sites surrounding the 5' end of the gene in proliferating, uninduced cells were determined: three were observed in the 5' flanking region and one within the gene.  Progressive changes in all sites accompanied the downregulation of MPO transcription after treatment with DMSO.  No evidence of hypersensitivity was observed in the chromatin region examined after 8 days of DMSO exposure.  The results provide an example of the changes that occur in the chromatin structure of a gene as it is inactivated during differentiation.
Six years' audit of laboratory workload and rates of referral for colposcopy in a cervical screening programme in three districts   OBJECTIVE--To determine laboratory workload and rates of referral for colposcopy in a three district cervical screening programme during 1983-9 to assess the feasibility of accommodating call up of all women at risk, recall at three year intervals (now five year intervals), and investigation of women with all degrees of abnormality.  DESIGN--Analysis of computerised screening histories dating back to 1977 of women screened in the Avon cervical screening programme.  SETTING--Three district health authorities covering the population of Bristol and Weston-super-Mare, comprising 800,000 people, of whom 250,000 were female residents aged 20 to 64.  SUBJECTS--196,977 Women aged 20 to 64 screened in cervical screening programme since 1983.  RESULTS--Laboratory workload devoted to follow up of women with abnormalities increased sharply between 1987-8 and 1988-9, with increases of 54% (from 2075 to 3196) in the number of smears for follow up of severe dyskaryosis and invasive cancer, 40% (from 1925 to 2695) for mild and moderate dyskaryosis, and 49% (from 1793 to 2677) for borderline change.  The increases were partly explained by the introduction in April 1988 of protocols for follow up and investigation based on guidance in an intercollegiate working party report.  The proportion of women with mild and moderate dyskaryosis who were recommended for referral for colposcopy increased steadily from 9.9% in 1983-4 to 79.9% in 1988-9, and for borderline change the proportions were 3.5% and 13.6% respectively.  Of all women tested in 1988-9, referral for colposcopy was recommended in 3%.  CONCLUSIONS--The increase in laboratory follow up work identified, if it continued, could result in half of existing laboratory capacity in Avon being devoted to follow up work by 1993, with little prospect of maintaining call, recall, and quality control.  Investigation of all women with minor cytological abnormalities is neither justifiable nor sustainable and will undermine the benefits of screening by increasing the rate of false positive results and the financial costs.
How district health authorities organise cervical screening [published erratum appears in BMJ 1990 Nov 24;301(6762):1209]  OBJECTIVES--To examine how district health authorities organised cervical screening with respect to Department of Health guidelines and to determine their assessment of the problems encountered.  DESIGN--Postal questionnaire sent to all 190 district health authorities in England in 1989.  PARTICIPANTS--190 District health authorities in England.  MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES--Population coverage of screening, quality of smear testing, and follow up of abdominal test results in comparison with national guidelines for district cervical screening services, and problems encountered by districts.  RESULTS--Replies were received from 178 (94%) of districts, in 143 of which the person named as responsible for cervical screening contributed.  All districts implemented a computer managed scheme, 150 by the target date of 31 March 1988, but not all of these conformed with the guidelines.  At the time of the survey only just over half called women in the target age group of 20-64 and only 70% expected to meet the target date of 13 March 1993 for completing the call.  Considerable variation was evident among the schemes with regard to how they dealt with issues related to population coverage, quality of testing, and follow up of abnormal results.  The problems most commonly identified by the districts (n = 174) were laboratory workload (107, 61%), computer software (104, 60%), availability of resources (78, 45%), non-attendance (77, 44%), rate of opportunistic screening (62, 36%), and investigation and treatment (60, 34%).  CONCLUSIONS--Current practice in running cervical screening schemes needs to be examined to determine the extent to which it contributes to the goal of reducing mortality from cervical cancer.
Etoposide. Current and future status.  Etoposide (VP-16-213) is an antineoplastic agent with demonstrated efficacy against a broad spectrum of human malignancies, including testicular, germ cell, lung, and other cancers.  Etoposide can be synergistic with other agents.  As part of combination chemotherapy, etoposide has become a so-called standard in therapies for testicular cancer and small cell lung cancer.  Its activity in tumors such as lymphoma and leukemia, as well as solid tumors, identifies etoposide as a highly important chemotherapeutic agent.  Cellular and animal models have shown that the cell kill and tumor response depend on both dose and time of exposure.  Recent clinical studies again show that dose and schedule of etoposide can have important effects on clinical response to the drug.  Further research should now continue: (1) on the use of etoposide as part of initial therapy in several cancers, and (2) in higher doses and prolonged schedules to optimize this agent's potential.
New chemotherapies for ovarian cancer. Systemic and intraperitoneal podophyllotoxins.  The epipodophyllotoxin derivatives etoposide and teniposide have been evaluated intermittently for possible use in the treatment of ovarian cancer.  Conflicting studies suggest that variables such as dose and prior treatment have a major influence on outcome.  Response rates ranged from 0% to 40% in five series with teniposide, and from less than a 10% overall response rate to greater than a 10% complete response rate in nine studies with etoposide.  One study documented activity with oral etoposide.  However, because all patients had received various prior chemotherapies, firm conclusions regarding the activity of etoposide could not be drawn.  These results, and the expectation of synergy with etoposide and cisplatin, led to several studies that combined etoposide with platin compounds by the systemic and intraperitoneal (IP) routes.  Various studies have used intravenous drug combinations of these agents in both previously treated and untreated patients.  One study, which used carboplatin instead of cisplatin, reported only seven failures among 26 previously untreated patients.  Conversely, the prominent toxicities reported by another study were discouraging, and responses did not exceed what might be expected from cisplatin alone.  Studies of analogous combinations administered IP are ongoing.  A favorable experience, which was initially reported by the University of California (San Diego group), is being confirmed by other investigators.  This has prompted the incorporation of etoposide into first-line strategies.  The pharmacologic advantage of etoposide by the IP route (related to its high protein binding) may provide appropriate dose intensity against IP disease while sparing systemic toxicities.  Finally, systemic dose intensity with autologous bone marrow support indicates some promise for etoposide in combination with high-dose alkylating drugs.
Current strategies in the management of locoregional and metastatic gastric carcinoma.  Gastric carcinoma remains a significant cause of death worldwide.  A patient's prognosis depends on the degree of gastric wall penetration, presence of lymph node metastases, and location of the primary site.  Metastatic gastric carcinoma is currently incurable.  However, chemotherapy continues to evolve at a rapid pace.  Active agents include 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), doxorubicin, cisplatin, methotrexate, mitomycin, and etoposide.  Combination etoposide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (EAP) has been reported to result in encouragingly high response rates, including a 10% complete response rate in patients with metastatic gastric carcinoma.  Trials are now under way to confirm these results.  Similarly, another etoposide-based combination, etoposide, leucovorin, and 5-FU (ELF), has resulted in an equally good response rate but less toxicity than EAP.  The 5-FU, doxorubicin, and methotrexate (FAMTX) regimen, previously reported to have an excellent response rate, is also being investigated further.  For patients with locoregional carcinoma, curative resection rate is often unsatisfactorily low; however, curative resection is consistently associated with improved survival (between 23 and 26 months).  In patients with potentially resectable carcinoma, two significant problems must be recognized: (1) a low rate of curative resection and (2) the development of widespread carcinoma despite curative resection.  Despite many attempts, the postoperative strategies of adjuvant chemotherapy have been ineffective.  New strategies must be investigated aggressively.  Combination etoposide, 5-FU, and cisplatin (EFP) has been administered preoperatively and postoperatively to patients with resectable gastric carcinoma, resulting in an encouraging curative resection rate (greater than 70%) and manageable toxicity.  Based on promising results reported with EAP in patients with unresectable locoregional carcinoma of the stomach, a trial of preoperative and postoperative EAP in potentially resectable carcinoma of the stomach is now under way.
Etoposide in the management of metastatic breast cancer.  Etoposide, despite extensive use in other malignancies, has played a minor role in the treatment of patients with breast cancer.  Single-agent trials in which etoposide is administered to heavily pretreated patients with metastatic breast cancer have demonstrated a low overall response rate (6.6% of 383 patients), with no convincing evidence for either schedule dependence or a relationship between dose intensity and response.  The sole single-agent trial in previously untreated patients suggested that the drug has an approximately 15% response rate in untreated patients.  Combination therapy trials in which etoposide has been combined with either cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, or cisplatin have not yet convincingly demonstrated superiority over any of these drugs as single agents, although cisplatin plus etoposide appears to be superior to either agent alone.  In vitro studies suggest that pretreating hormone-sensitive breast cancer cells with estradiol may increase their sensitivity to etoposide-induced DNA cleavage.  This may represent a future direction in the use of etoposide in breast cancer.  Currently, however, the use of etoposide in breast cancer should be considered investigational.
Etoposide in leukemia.  Etoposide (VP16-213, NSC 141540) induces a complete response (CR) in 15% to 25% of previously treated patients with acute nonlymphocytic leukemia (ANLL) when used as a single agent.  Etoposide has been used successfully in combination with cytarabine, daunorubicin, and amsacrine for salvage and consolidation therapies.  Previously untreated ANLL patients 15 to 70 years of age were randomly assigned to cytarabine (100 mg/m2) on days 1 to 7 plus daunorubicin (50 mg/m2) on days 1 to 3 (7-3) or to the same drugs plus etoposide (75 mg/m2) on days 1 to 7 (7-3-7).  Patients achieving a CR received two consolidation courses (5-2, attenuated 7-3 or 5-2-5).  Among 264 eligible patients, there was a 56% CR rate with 7-3 therapy and a 59% CR rate with 7-3-7 therapy.  Remission duration was significantly improved with 7-3-7 (median, 12 months with 7-3 and 18 months with 7-3-7; P = 0.01), but survival was not.  Subset analysis in patients younger than 55 years of age revealed prolonged remission (median, 12 months with 7-3 and 27 months with 7-3-7; P = 0.01) and survival (median, 9 months with 7-3 and 17 months with 7-3-7; P = 0.04) with the 7-3-7 regimen.  Hematologic toxicity was similar for both regimens during induction, but significantly more severe for 7-3-7 during consolidation therapy.  Etoposide is active in ANLL and prolongs remission when used in induction therapy.
High-dose etoposide and marrow transplantation.  Etoposide underwent conventional Phase I testing in the 1970s.  The dose-limiting toxicity in these studies was mild myelosuppression; other toxicities were infrequent.  If a greater degree of myelosuppression is accepted, higher than standard doses could be given.  This approach takes advantage of the steep dose-response relationship for most chemotherapeutic agents, including etoposide, as shown in early in vitro and clinical studies.  Thus, etoposide was considered an ideal agent for further dose-escalation studies, given its wide range of clinical antitumor activity at standard doses, steep dose-response curve, mild bone marrow suppression, and few nonmyeloid side effects.  The high-dose etoposide studies that followed used improved and more intensive hematologic supportive care, including, in some trials, autologous marrow transplantation.  When etoposide was used as a single agent in these high-dose trials, mucositis, and, to a lesser degree, hepatic dysfunction were dose-limiting.  The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) in this setting was 2.4 to 3.0 g/m2.  Multi-agent Phase I trials with etoposide and cyclophosphamide, total body irradiation, carmustine, or carboplatin also resulted in dose-limiting mucosal toxicity, with liver and lung problems appearing more often than with high-dose etoposide alone.  The toxicity and MTD can be influenced markedly by the schedule of administration.  Etoposide as a continuous intravenous infusion can be given at doses of 4.2 g/m2 (with 200 mg/kg cyclophosphamide) with similar toxicity, but without marrow support.  The antitumor results in the lymphomas set the stage for treatment of solid tumors, where treatment of patients with "sensitive" relapses had the best outcome.  Lymphoma patients had an 80% response rate; overall, long-term (greater than 2 years) disease-free survival was approximately 40%.  Germ cell tumors were also responsive, and the same pattern of sensitive relapses and improvement in responding patients was seen (50% to 75% of patients greater than 1 year).  In breast cancer and small cell lung cancer (SCLC), high-dose etoposide-containing regimens were used to intensify standard therapy.  The results in these settings were not quite as good (breast cancer, 30% disease-free survival at 2 years; SCLC, 10% at 2 years).
The pharmacology of intravenous and oral etoposide.  The epipodophyllotoxin derivative etoposide (VP-16) has been in widespread use both alone and in combination chemotherapy for the past decade.  It has phase-specific cytotoxicity that acts in the last S and G2 phases of the cell cycle.  Although its mode of action is not certain, it appears to act by causing breaks in DNA by interaction with DNA-topoisomerase II or by the formation of free radicals.  Most studies show biexponential decay after the intravenous (IV) administration of etoposide.  Approximately 30% to 70% of administered etoposide is excreted, with approximately 45% present in the urine.  Etoposide is available in oral and IV preparations.  It is highly schedule-dependent, with once-daily doses (e.g., for 5 to 8 days every 21 days) giving results superior to intermittent administration.  The bioavailability of oral etoposide is approximately 50%, but its absorption is not linear with increasing dose (e.g., greater than 200 mg/d, bioavailability decreases).  Factors influencing the bioavailability of oral etoposide include patient status, concurrent medications, hepatic and renal function, and nausea and vomiting.  In numerous clinical trials, etoposide has demonstrated excellent activity against a range of tumors, including small cell lung cancer (SCLC), malignant lymphomas, gestational trophoblastic tumors, Ewing's and soft tissue sarcomas, and germ cell tumors, with more modest activity in other tumors (e.g., non-SCLC).  Although few comparative studies have been carried out, available data suggest that oral etoposide administered daily during 5 to 8 days is similar to the IV preparation in range of activity.  In a study of 53 elderly patients with SCLC treated with etoposide (200 mg/d for five times), there was a response rate of 79% and a median survival of 9.5 months.  These results were similar to those achieved with more intensive IV regimens.  Several studies of chronic oral etoposide (50 mg/m2/d for 21 times) have been reported recently.  Responses were observed in SCLC and germ cell tumors among patients who had relapsed after standard etoposide-containing regimens.  These data suggest that etoposide may be a "new" drug when given in this schedule.  The high response rates with oral etoposide suggest that oral administration may be substituted for IV administration.  This substitution may allow for greater flexibility in chemotherapeutic administration, less hospitalization, and more acceptable toxicity.
Chronic oral etoposide.  Etoposide is an important drug that has been recently incorporated with other agents in the curative treatment of patients with advanced neoplasms, including germ cell tumors, non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHL), and small cell lung cancer (SCLC).  Etoposide demonstrates remarkable schedule dependency.  A randomized comparison has shown an impressive survival difference for patients with extensive SCLC receiving a 5-day course versus those receiving a 1-day course.  Because of these and previous clinical and laboratory data, etoposide is now given intravenously or orally in a 3-day to 5-day schedule.  It is generally accepted that approximately 50% of the orally administered drug is absorbed.  The authors have initiated several etoposide studies using an extended administration schedule, believing that a prolonged schedule may be superior to the standard 3-day to 5-day schedule.  This was initially tested in a Phase I study.  Results showed that etoposide (50 mg/m2/d) given over 21 days was feasible and was associated with only moderate toxicity.  Several Phase II studies have been completed or are nearing completion, including studies in patients with SCLC, NHL, germ cell tumors, soft tissue sarcoma, renal carcinoma, and ovarian carcinoma.  Responses have been seen in all of these groups, particularly in patients with SCLC, lymphoma, and germ cell tumors.  In these groups we saw responses in patients who were clearly resistant to etoposide plus cisplatin given in a standard schedule or in some patients who were resistant to high-dose etoposide with bone marrow transplantation.  Investigators at Indiana University Medical Center who studied oral etoposide in a similar fashion in patients with advanced germ cell tumors and SCLC achieved results similar to those reported here.  The authors have initiated a number of combination chemotherapy programs using the chronic oral form of etoposide.  These include patients with SCLC, non-small cell lung cancer, and elderly patients with high-grade and intermediate forms of NHL.  In addition, chronic intravenous oral etoposide is being used in salvage approaches for patients with acute myelocytic leukemia and recurrent resistant intermediate-grade and high-grade NHL.  Preliminary pharmacokinetic data suggest that a 50-mg/m2 oral dose is highly bioavailable (91% to 96%).  Therefore, during a prolonged oral course at 50 mg/m2, many patients maintain a minimum plasma concentration of 1 microgram/ml.  Further studies of multiple dose or continuous infusion etoposide to maintain a potentially critical plasma level are in progress.  Etoposide administered in this way could represent a "new" drug because many of its features are different, and its activity spectrum may be broader.
Future directions for etoposide therapy.  Etoposide is an important chemotherapeutic agent in the treatment of selected patients with germ cell tumors, lymphomas, and small cell lung cancer (SCLC).  Its optimal use is continuing to evolve.  It is clear that schedule dependency is of critical importance.  Recently, preliminary studies have suggested that a prolonged schedule of etoposide administration (21 days) may be more effective than the standard 3- to 5-day schedule.  Results of several Phase II studies show chronic oral etoposide administration induces occasional responses in resistant tumors and higher-than-expected response rates in patients with germ cell tumors and SCLC.  Preliminary data show nearly 90% etoposide absorption when given in a low-dose schedule (50 mg/m2/d) for 21 days.  These observations indicate that etoposide may be a "new drug" when given in the chronic schedule.  Further exploration of the schedule dependency of etoposide is indicated.  Etoposide has recently been proven useful in selected patients with gastric, ovarian, and poorly differentiated carcinoma of unknown primary site.  Several other drugs are either synergistic or additive and will be explored in combination chemotherapy.  The possibility of adding topoisomerase I inhibitors and modulating etoposide's activity by inhibiting drug resistance is now within the realm of human testing.
The clinical pharmacology of etoposide.  Etoposide, a semisynthetic derivative of podophyllotoxin, is increasingly used to treat cancer.  Etoposide is a phase-specific, cytotoxic drug acting in the late S and early G2 phases of the cell cycle.  It appears to cause breaks in DNA by either an interaction with DNA-topoisomerase II or the formation of free radicals.  Most studies show a biexponential decay after the intravenous (IV) administration of etoposide.  The peak plasma concentrations of drug and the area under the concentration versus time curve (AUC) are linearly related to the IV dose.  Considerable interpatient variability of pharmacokinetic variables exists after IV etoposide.  Various metabolites of etoposide have been identified, but their detection and quantitation are disputed.  Approximately 30% to 70% of an etoposide dose is excreted.  The bioavailability of oral etoposide is approximately 50%, but its absorption is not linear with increasing doses within the range in clinical use.  Considerable interpatient and intrapatient variability exists in the pharmacokinetics of oral etoposide.  There is no evidence of etoposide accumulation after multiple consecutive doses by either the IV or oral route.  The exact roles of the liver and kidney in metabolism and excretion of etoposide are uncertain.  Etoposide has been shown to be a highly schedule-dependent drug in clinical studies.  This, together with the phase-specific action of etoposide and its increasingly widespread use in treating cancer, makes the clinical pharmacology of this drug of great clinical importance.
Limb-salvage surgery in the treatment of osteosarcoma in skeletally immature individuals.  Sacrifice of major growth plates during resection and fixed-length reconstruction of a limb in a skeletally immature child with osteosarcoma may result in a significant limb-length inequality as growth progresses.  A limb-length discrepancy in the humerus may cause minor cosmetic problems but does not generally result in a significant functional deficit.  In the lower extremity, tumors about the knee, including the distal femur and proximal tibia, usually present the dilemma of whether limb salvage by arthrodesis, osteoarticular allograft, or endoprosthetic replacement would result in a significant limb-length inequality and whether amputation of the extremity is a preferable procedure.  The techniques of rotationplasty and an expandable endoprosthesis have been successfully used for treating skeletally immature patients with osteosarcoma of the distal femur.  With regard to survival and function, the results obtained with these innovative methods are favorable compared with those of a high above-knee amputation.
The cellular biology of bone tumors.  New knowledge in cell and molecular biology has begun to expand the understanding of the biology of osteosarcoma and Ewing's sarcoma.  Studies on osteosarcomas have revealed abnormalities in the growth-inhibiting retinoblastoma gene, which may release cells from normal growth control.  Abnormalities in growth factor production or response tend to inappropriately activate cell growth.  Tumor cell DNA content and cytogenetics may affect the diagnosis and prognostic grouping of osteosarcomas.  In Ewing's sarcomas, a characteristic translocation between Chromosomes 11 and 22 has been identified; this translocation is also found in malignant neuroepitheliomas.  A variety of studies point to both neuroectodermal and mesenchymal origins for Ewing's sarcomas.  Applications of new biologic knowledge and technology to clinical problems will lead to significant changes in the diagnosis, and perhaps in the treatment, of these tumors in the coming years.  Collaborations between community and referral center physicians and scientists are critical for continued progress.
Osteoid osteoma of the scapula. A case report and review of the literature.  The scapula is a rare location for osteoid osteoma, which in most cases does not involve the flat bones.  The en bloc excision in this uncommon location can be problematic since the surgical exposure is difficult, and shoulder joint function can be affected if the lesion is subchondral.  In an 18-year-old man, an osteoid osteoma was located in the subchondral area of the glenoid.  A guided needle biopsy of the nidus resulted in complete healing.  This mode of treatment, with proper follow-up examination, is acceptable for a benign lesion situated in a problematic location.
Cryosurgery and acrylic cementation as surgical adjuncts in the treatment of aggressive (benign) bone tumors. Analysis of 25 patients below the age of 21.  This article reviews the clinical experience with cryosurgery (use of liquid nitrogen) and acrylic cementation (polymethylmethacrylate; PMMA) in the treatment of aggressive, benign bone sarcomas and the biologic basis of this technique.  The results of 25 patients below the age of 21 treated by cryosurgery, with an average follow-up period of 60.8 months, are reported.  Three approaches to surgical reconstruction were used: Group 1 (four patients) had cryosurgery with no reconstruction, Group 2 (13 patients) had bone graft reconstruction alone, and Group 3 (eight patients) had composite osteosynthesis with internal fixation, bone graft, and/or PMMA.  The overall control rate was 96% (one recurrence).  The tumor types were giant-cell tumor, chondroblastoma, aneurysmal bone cyst, and malignant giant-cell tumor.  Nineteen lesions involved the lower extremity, and six lesions were located in the upper extremity.  There were two secondary fractures (8%), one local flap necrosis, and one synovial fistula.  There were no infections.  Two epiphyseodeses were performed.  The functional results were excellent (83%), good (13%), and fair (4%).  The technique of composite osteosynthesis is recommended for all large tumors of the lower extremity.  Cryosurgical results compare favorably with those obtained by en bloc resection and demonstrate the ability of cryosurgery to eradicate tumors while avoiding the need for extensive resections and reconstructive procedures.
Limb reconstruction with vascularized fibular grafts after bone tumor resection.  Limb-salvage operations are being used with increasing frequency for patients with malignant bone tumors.  For children, when a biologic reconstruction is desired, the choice is often between conventional and vascularized fibular grafts.  An experimental study was performed in dogs to compare the two types of fibular grafts for bridging segmental defects in the radius and ulna.  Twenty-six adult dogs were divided into two groups and studied at intervals of two, three, four, six, and 12 months after transplantation.  The conventional grafts healed by creeping substitution i.e., they were first partially resorbed before new bone was laid down.  In contrast, the vascularized fibulae maintained their normal structure and hypertrophied by subperiosteal new bone formation.  The conventional fibulae eventually hypertrophied but much later than the vascularized grafts.  The vascularized grafts were stronger at four and six months.  Between six and 12 months, both grafts remodeled to resemble the size and shape of the forearm bones they were replacing.  These experimental results have influenced the treatment of patients.  Vascularized fibular grafts are ideal for diaphyseal defects greater than 10 cm long, especially in very young children, a poorly vascularized bed, or when bone healing is delayed by chemotherapeutic agents.  To maximize hypertrophy, an external fixator is used to immobilize the graft rather than a plate, which acts as a stress shield.
Modified Van Nes rotationplasty in the treatment of malignant neoplasms in the lower extremities of children.  A technique of modified Van Nes rotationplasty has been used since 1981 for limb salvage surgery in children and adolescents with malignant sarcoma of the lower extremity.  The original procedure for lesions of the distal femur was further modified and adopted for selected lesions of the proximal femur and tibia.  Sixteen skeletally immature children form the base of this report.  The tumors were located in the distal femur in ten children, the proximal tibia in five and the proximal femur in one.  There were no intraoperative complications and postoperative complications included one infection requiring debridement and three minor healing delays.  There were no local recurrences, neurovascular compromises, late derotations, or psychologic decompensations.  One patient died of metastatic disease and another died of a second malignancy (leukemia).  The remaining patients are good, functional, below-knee prosthesis users who participate in a number of sporting and athletic activities.  The procedure is safe, has a relatively low complication rate, allows for the functional demands of an active, growing child, and accommodates for the future growth of extremities.
Ewing's sarcoma. Prognostic factors, disease control, and the reemerging role of surgical treatment.  Advances in the treatment of Ewing's sarcoma have been dramatic.  Present treatment protocols control local disease by radiotherapy, surgery, or both; systemic spread is limited by aggressive multiagent chemotherapy.  In patients with localized osseous Ewing's sarcoma, five-year survival rates now range from 54% to an estimated 74%.  With late relapse not uncommon, control of the primary lesion is critical to long-term survival.  Several studies now show improved local control and possibly improved survival of patients with surgical treatment of primary osseous Ewing's sarcoma.
The effect of chemotherapy on growth in the skeletally immature individual.  One hundred twenty-two children with nonmetastatic osteogenic or Ewing's sarcoma were studied to assess the effect of multiagent adjuvant chemotherapy on skeletal growth and final stature.  No deviations from the height distributions of a normal population were noted at diagnosis.  There was a marked retardation of linear growth during the year of intensive chemotherapy.  Only 15% of the patients grew at the expected rate during that year.  The distribution of nutritional status scores was significantly different at the end of the first year than at baseline.  The distribution of ultimate height scores was significantly different than the baseline distribution.  The overall final distribution was also significantly different from the normal population expectation.  Any absolute difference in height, however, is likely to be small.  The subgroups that were observed to full adult stature showed mean heights of 162 cm for girls and 176 cm for boys.
The growth inhibition of human breast cancer cells by a novel synthetic progestin involves the induction of transforming growth factor beta.  Recent experimental work has identified a novel intracellular binding site for the synthetic progestin, Gestodene, that appears to be uniquely expressed in human breast cancer cells.  Gestodene is shown here to inhibit the growth of human breast cancer cells in a dose-dependent fashion, but has no effect on endocrine-responsive human endometrial cancer cells.  Gestodene induced a 90-fold increase in the secretion of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) by T47D human breast cancer cells.  Other synthetic progestins had no effect, indicating that this induction is mediated by the novel Gestodene binding site and not by the conventional progesterone receptor.  Furthermore, in four breast cancer cell lines, the extent of induction of TGF-beta correlated with intracellular levels of Gestodene binding site.  No induction of TGF-beta was observed with the endometrial cancer line, HECl-B, which lacks the Gestodene binding site, but which expresses high levels of progesterone receptor.  The inhibition of growth of T47D cells by Gestodene is partly reversible by a polyclonal antiserum to TGF-beta.  These data indicate that the growth-inhibitory action of Gestodene may be mediated in part by an autocrine induction of TGF-beta.
Coexpression of two fibronectin receptors, VLA-4 and VLA-5, by immature human erythroblastic precursor cells.  Human erythroblastic precursor cells adhere to fibronectin (Fn) but the exact nature of the receptors mediating this interaction has not been characterized.  In this study, we report data showing that immature human erythroblasts express the integrins VLA-4 and VLA-5 and that both these molecules act as fibronectin receptors on these cells.  We have recently demonstrated that adhesion to Fn of purified human CFU-E and their immediate progeny preproerythroblasts was inhibited by antibodies directed against the human fibronectin receptor (VLA-5).  Here we have extended those results and characterized by immunoprecipitation with specific antibodies the integrins expressed on surface-labeled normal human immature erythroblasts.  A polyclonal antibody recognizing the common VLA beta 1 subunit yielded two polypeptides of 120 and 160 kD.  Our data further demonstrate that the polypeptide of 160 kD contains alpha subunits corresponding to both alpha 4 and alpha 5.  Thus, erythroblast lysates prepared in 0.3% CHAPS and immunoprecipitated with antibodies which specifically recognize the alpha 4 subunit showed a heterodimer with peptides of 120 (beta 1) and 160 kD (alpha 4) and the additional peptides of 70 and 80 kD which usually coprecipitate with the alpha 4 chain.  On the other hand, specific anti-alpha 5 antibodies immunoprecipitated an alpha 5/beta 1 complex with peptides of 120 and 160 kD which under reducing conditions migrated as a single band of 130 kD.  Similar experiments performed with an erythroleukemic cell line (KU 812) showed that these cells also coexpress both the VLA-4 and VLA-5 members of the integrin family.  Furthermore, monoclonal antibodies recognizing the VLA alpha 4 chain blocked the adhesion of immature erythroblasts to Fn-coated surfaces, thus demonstrating that, as VLA-5, VLA-4 is also a functional Fn receptor on these cells.
Measurement techniques for melanoma: a statistical comparison   Inter- and intra-observer variation in measuring the depth of invasion of malignant melanomas was assessed using three different techniques: eye-piece graticule, stage Vernier, and projection image analysis.  Significant variation was found for all methods but was least pronounced with the stage Vernier.  It is recommended that this should be the preferred technique for routine use.
Cartilage removal prior to skin grafting in the triangular fossa, antihelix, and concha of the ear.  Skin grafting onto a large area of exposed ear cartilage with irregular contours poses an increased risk of inadequate re-establishment of circulation.  Removal of cartilage not needed for structural support before grafting following Mohs surgery on the triangular fossa, antihelix, and concha of the ear decreases the risk of recurrence of the carcinoma, and increases the chances for survival of the graft.
Fine-needle aspiration for diagnosis of intranodal squamous-cell carcinoma metastatic from the skin.  Fine-needle aspiration is a useful way to determine the presence of squamous-cell carcinoma in enlarged lymph nodes of patients at high risk for metastases.  Advantages include a high degree of accuracy, outpatient as well as inpatient availability, and negligible potential for seeding of malignant cells.  Cutaneous oncologists should consider using this technique in patients with lymphadenopathy and a previous history of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.
HiC-COM: a 2-month intensive chemotherapy regimen for children with stage III and IV Burkitt's lymphoma and B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.  We designed a protocol that included 2 months of intensive Cytoxan (cyclophosphamide; Bristol-Myers Co, Evansville, IN), high-dose methotrexate (MTX), high-dose cytarabine (ara-C), and vincristine (HiC-COM) to improve event-free survival (EFS) for patients with advanced-stage Burkitt's lymphoma and B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).  We also wished to test the feasibility of rapidly cycling Cytoxan and high-dose ara-C based on signs of early marrow recovery.  Twenty patients including 12 with stage III Burkitt's lymphoma and eight with stage IV Burkitt's lymphoma or B-cell ALL were entered onto this pilot study.  The rate of complete remission was 95%.  Four patients have relapsed.  The 2-year actuarial EFS was 75% (median follow-up, 37 months).  Two of the initial five patients developed transverse myelitis, which we believe may have been secondary to the concomitant administration of intrathecal (IT) and high-dose systemic ara-C.  We conclude that this short but intensive regimen is highly effective for patients with advanced Burkitt's lymphoma and B-cell ALL.  EFS has improved over previous less intensive regimens, and is comparable to regimens of longer duration.
High-dose chemoradiotherapy supported by marrow infusions for advanced neuroblastoma: a Pediatric Oncology Group study [published erratum appears in J Clin Oncol 1991 Jun;9(6):1094]  We conducted a pilot protocol at seven Pediatric Oncology Group (POG) institutions to examine the feasibility, toxicity, and efficacy of using a common regimen of high-dose chemoradiotherapy (HD CT/RT) supported by autologous or allogeneic marrow infusions in children with metastatic neuroblastoma (NBL) in first or second remission.  During a 57-month period, we accrued 101 patients.  We report here results for the 81 who completed treatment at least 2 years ago.  The HD CT/RT regimen consisted of melphalan 60 mg/m2/d for three doses, and total body irradiation (TBI) either 1.5 Gy (n = 27) or 2.0 Gy (n = 54) twice daily for six doses.  Twenty-three patients also received irradiation consisting of 1.2 Gy twice daily for 10 doses to persisting disease sites.  Seventy-four were given autologous and seven allogeneic marrow, 64 autologous marrows being purged immunomagnetically.  Fifty-four children were in first complete (CR) or partial (PR) remission and 27 in second CR or PR.  As of October 1, 1990, follow-up was from 32 to 72 months.  Forty-seven of these 81 children relapsed, 10 died of complications, one of unknown cause, and 23 continue in remission, including 21 of the 54 treated in first remission, and 16 who completed treatment more than 3 years ago.  The 2-year actuarial event-free survival (EFS) probabilities are first CR (CR1) 32% (SE 10%), first PR (PR1) 43% (SE 9%), second CR (CR2) 33% (SE 27%), and second PR (PR2) 5% (SE 5%).  Probability of EFS correlated with remission number (first better than second, P less than .001), with interval from diagnosis to HD CT/RT (greater than 9 months better than less than 9 months, P = .055), and with TBI dose (12 Gy better than 9 Gy, P = .031).  These encouraging results may partly reflect selection for this treatment of patients with NBL who have a slower disease pace.
Relationship of tumor-cell ploidy to histologic subtype and treatment outcome in children and adolescents with unresectable rhabdomyosarcoma [published erratum appears in J Clin Oncol 1991 May;9(5):893]  Clinical and histopathologic features are often inadequate for accurate prediction of relapse or survival of individual patients with rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS).  We therefore studied the cellular DNA content (ploidy) of RMS cells in relation to histology and response to therapy in 37 patients with unresectable tumors.  Using flow cytometric techniques, we found that about one third of patients had diploid tumor stem lines, regardless of the histologic subtype.  In the group with abnormal ploidy, a hyperdiploid classification (1.10 to 1.80 times the DNA content of normal diploid cells) was exclusively associated with embryonal histology (P = .001).  By contrast, near-tetraploidy (1.80 to 2.60 times the DNA content of normal cells) was strongly associated with alveolar histology (P = .001).  Thus, in these histologic subtypes of RMS, abnormal ploidy appears to arise through different mechanisms.  Tumor-cell ploidy had a significant impact on survival that was especially apparent in patients with unresectable, nonmetastatic (group III) tumors.  In this subgroup, hyperdiploidy conferred the best prognosis and diploidy the worst (P less than .0001).  None of the eight patients with diploid tumors survived for more than 18 months.  Tumor-cell ploidy was the best predictor of treatment outcome for patients with either embryonal (P less than .001; relative risk, 25.5) or alveolar (P = .073; relative risk 7.1) RMS and contributed significantly after adjustment for disease stage and anatomic site.  Patients with unresectable diploid RMS have an unacceptably high risk of treatment failure, justifying new therapeutic approaches for this distinct subgroup.
Fludarabine phosphate: a synthetic purine antimetabolite with significant activity against lymphoid malignancies.  Fludarabine phosphate is the 2-fluoro, 5'-monophosphate derivative of vidarabine (ara-A) with the advantages of resistance to deamination by adenosine deaminase (ADA) and improved solubility.  The mechanism of cytotoxic action of the compound appears to involve metabolic conversion to the active triphosphate.  Fludarabine phosphate has substantial activity against lymphoid malignancies, particularly chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL).  Its single-agent activity in CLL appears at least comparable to those of other conventional combination regimens.  Its activity in Hodgkin's disease, mycosis fungoides, and macroglobulinemia, although suggestive, needs to be further defined and clinical trials are warranted in hairy cell leukemia, prolymphocytic leukemia, and previously untreated myeloma.  The compound does not appear active against most common solid tumors.  Early clinical trials indicated significant myelosuppression and the potential for severe neurotoxicity.  Toxicity on the currently used low-dose schedules includes transient and reversible myelosuppression, nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, somnolence/fatigue, and elevations of liver enzymes and/or serum creatinine.  Possible pulmonary toxicity has been suggested in several patients.  The currently used low-doses of fludarabine phosphate, even with repeated administration, are well tolerated and appear safe with a negligible risk for severe neurotoxicity.  Based on its single-agent activity and tolerability, the Food and Drug Administration recently granted group C designation of the drug for the treatment of patients with refractory CLL outside the clinical trials setting.  The use of fludarabine phosphate in combination regimens and its impact on the natural history of the lymphoid malignancies is yet to be determined.  Fludarabine phosphate may well occupy a pivotal role in the management of CLL and low-grade NHL.
How American oncologists treat breast cancer: an assessment of the influence of clinical trials.  The present study was designed to assess the preferred methods of treatment of breast cancer by American oncologists, and the impact of clinical trials on their practice.  We mailed 465 questionnaires to surgical, radiation, or medical oncologists.  The questionnaire described five hypothetic patients with breast cancer, and respondents were asked to select their preferred treatment for each patient.  For primary breast cancer, most physicians would offer the choice of local excision followed by radiation therapy or modified radical mastectomy.  About 80% of physicians would prescribe adjuvant chemotherapy for a premenopausal woman with estrogen receptor-negative, axillary node negative breast cancer, and for a postmenopausal woman with estrogen receptor-negative, node-positive disease.  This policy was favored by male and female physicians of each specialty.  Almost all respondents would treat a young woman with inflammatory breast cancer with initial chemotherapy followed by radiation and/or surgery, and about 60% would recommend chemotherapy to a postmenopausal patient with estrogen receptor-negative disease and minimally symptomatic bone metastases.  Clinical trials have compared treatment strategies that could be applied to patients described in our questionnaire.  Preferred treatments for primary breast cancer, and for inflammatory breast cancer are supported by the results of clinical trials.  Recommendation of adjuvant chemotherapy for node-negative breast cancer is not based on a consistent demonstration of improvement in survival, although randomized trials with short follow-up have shown delay to recurrence.  Recommendation of adjuvant chemotherapy for a postmenopausal woman with node-positive breast cancer is contrary to the results of large randomized controlled trials (and to a meta-analysis), which have shown that this policy does not lead to improved survival.  Our report suggests that even large randomized clinical trials may have a minimal impact on practice if their results run counter to belief in the value of the treatment.
4-Hydroperoxycyclophosphamide purging of breast cancer from the mononuclear cell fraction of bone marrow in patients receiving high-dose chemotherapy and autologous marrow support: a phase I trial.  We designed an ex vivo bone marrow treatment for breast cancer patients receiving high-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow support (ABMS), using 4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide (4-HC), an active derivative of cyclophosphamide with known activity against breast cancer.  This phase I bone marrow purging trial used ficoll-separated mononuclear cells (MNC) (devoid of granulocytes and RBCs), as opposed to the buffy coat.  Twenty-five patients with metastatic breast cancer were studied.  Patients received three cycles of the Adriamycin (doxorubicin; Adria Laboratories, Columbus, OH), fluorouracil, and methotrexate (Duke AFM) regimen, followed by marrow harvest.  An MNC fraction of marrow was prepared and treated with 4-HC in concentrations of 20 micrograms/mL (four patients), 40 micrograms/mL (four patients), 60 micrograms/mL (nine patients), or 80 micrograms/mL (eight patients) and cryopreserved.  Patients then received high-dose systemic cyclophosphamide, cisplatin, and carmustine, followed by infusion of the purged marrow.  The study end point was marrow engraftment, defined as WBC count greater than 1,000 cells per microliter.  At the first three dose levels (20, 40, and 60 micrograms/mL 4-HC), there was no significant delay in time to engraftment (19, 20, and 23 days, respectively) compared with the unpurged historical controls (17 days).  At 80 micrograms/mL, engraftment was significantly delayed compared with the lower concentrations (P = .027), and further escalation of 4-HC was not attempted.  A significant correlation was observed between the time of leukocyte engraftment and the 4-HC concentration (P = .017).  With a methylcellulose-based tissue culture assay, we demonstrated a statistically significant correlation between the colony-forming unit-granulocyte-macrophage (CFU-GM) content in the purged marrow and the days to engraftment.  Ninety-five percent of patients responded clinically to the entire program, 55% of them completely.  Longer follow-up is required to assess the ultimate benefit of intensive therapy on long-term survival.
Phase I clinical trial with floxuridine and high-dose continuous infusion of leucovorin calcium.  Sixty-two patients with metastatic disease were treated with continuous infusion folinic acid (leucovorin calcium; Lv) and 2-deoxy-5-fluorouridine (floxuridine; FUDR).  Lv was given by constant intravenous (IV) infusion at 500 mg/m2/d, days 1 to 6, while FUDR was given by IV push, days 2 to 6, at 3:00 PM daily with doses ranging from 294 to 1,214 mg/m2/d.  This program was well tolerated with dose-limiting toxicities of diarrhea and stomatitis, while hematologic toxicity was minimal.  Eighty-two percent of the assessable patients (46 of 56) had failed at least one chemotherapy regimen.  One complete remission lasting 9 months and 10 partial remissions ranging from 5 to 10 months were observed in this heavily pretreated patient population for an overall response rate of 20%.  These data suggest that the combination therapy with Lv and FUDR may have clinical use.  Because of differing patient sensitivity to this drug combination, the recommended dose of FUDR for the initial therapy cycle is 500 mg/m2/d, days 2 to 6, with subsequent escalation to 900 mg/m2/d in those patients without extreme sensitivity.  Phase II studies are now in progress with these doses.
Extraoral application of osseointegrated implants.  The use of osseointegrated implants to provide support for craniofacial prostheses has provided the clinician with another approach to the treatment of complex craniofacial reconstructive problems.  The surgical technique is reviewed and the Mayo Clinic experience is presented.
Antisecretory and antilesional effect of a new histamine H2-receptor antagonist, IT-066, in rats.  The effects of a new histamine H2-receptor antagonist, IT-066 (3-amino-4-[4-[4-(1-piperidinomethyl)-2-pyridyloxy]-cis-2-++ +butenylamino]- 3-cyclobutene-1,2-dione hydrochloride), were investigated on the secretagogue-induced acid secretion in vivo and in vitro, and on experimental gastric and duodenal lesion in rats.  IT-066 (10-60 micrograms/kg) given i.v.  inhibited histamine-stimulated acid secretion dose-dependently in gastric lumen-perfused rats, and the inhibitory effect was observed for about 12 hr.  Famotidine (FMD) (10-60 micrograms/kg i.v.) also had an antisecretory effect, but the acid secretion recovered to the control level 4 hr after the administration.  Cold stress plus indomethacin-induced lesion was significantly inhibited by IT-066 and FMD given i.v.  30 min before the cold stress plus indomethacin treatment.  IT-066 given 7 hr before the cold stress plus indomethacin treatment also inhibited lesion formation significantly, but such antilesional effect was not observed with FMD.  In the rat isolated gastric mucosal sheet, IT-066 inhibited histamine-stimulated acid secretion dose-dependently and noncompetitively; its action was produced via a unique mechanism.  The inhibitory effect of IT-066 remained after washing of the mucosa, and became more potent time-dependently.  The inhibitory effects of FMD and cimetidine were not observed after washing the mucosa.  These data suggest that IT-066 has a potent and long lasting antisecretory effect in vivo and in vitro, and that these properties are responsible for the long lasting antilesional action.
Potent selective inhibition of 7-O-methyl UCN-01 against protein kinase C.  UCN-01 is a staurosporine-related compound that was isolated from the culture broth of Streptomyces sp.  and shows potent and selective inhibitory activity against protein kinase C.  Cellular inhibitory activity of UCN-01 against protein kinase C and cytotoxicity of UCN-01 were compared with those of staurosporine.  When the mechanism of inhibitory activity was investigated in vitro, UCN-01 as well as staurosporine inhibited the activity of the catalytic domain of protein kinase C.  In spite of direct inhibition against the catalytic domain of protein kinase C, cytotoxicity of UCN-01 was much lower than that of staurosporine.  In addition, UCN-01 showed more selective inhibitory activity against protein kinase C than did staurosporine because of the sole structural difference at C-7.  Therefore, a series of 7-O-alkyl derivatives of UCN-01 was synthesized and investigated.  Interestingly, one of the compounds, the beta-methoxy derivative, showed 3-fold greater potency and 17-fold more selective inhibitory activity against protein kinase C than did UCN-01.
Stimulatory effects of maitotoxin on insulin release in insulinoma HIT cells: role of calcium uptake and phosphoinositide breakdown.  In hamster insulinoma (HIT) cells, maitotoxin (MTX) induces a time-dependent and concentration-dependent release of insulin that requires the presence of extracellular calcium.  The response is nearly completely blocked by cinnarizine and cadmium, but is not inhibited by the L-type calcium channel blocker nifedipine or by manganese.  MTX induces 45Ca+ uptake in these cells in a dose-dependent mode, and the uptake is blocked with cinnarizine, nifedipine and cadmium, and is partially inhibited by manganese.  MTX induces phosphoinositide breakdown in HIT cells, and the response is partially blocked by cadmium, but is not affected by nifedipine, cinnarizine or manganese.  High concentrations of potassium ions also induce insulin release and calcium uptake in HIT cells.  Both effects of potassium are blocked partially by nifedipine, cadmium and cinnarizine.  High concentrations of potassium do not induce phosphoinositide breakdown in HIT cells.  The results suggest that MTX-elicited release of insulin is attained by two mechanisms: 1) a nifedipine-sensitive action, which results from MTX-induced activation of L-type calcium channels, which can be mimicked with high potassium concentrations; and 2) a nifedipine-insensitive action, which may be initiated by the activation of phosphoinositide breakdown by MTX.  Such an activation of phospholipase C would result in the formation of 1,4,5-inositol trisphosphate, a release of intracellular calcium and then release of insulin to the extracellular space.  Cinnarizine is proposed to block both MTX-elicited mechanisms, the first by blockade of calcium channels and the second by blocking 1,4,5-inositol trisphosphate-induced release of internal calcium.  Either mechanism alone appears capable of eliciting release of insulin.
Molecular surgery of the basement membrane by the argon laser.  Although the argon laser is used successfully to weld a number of different tissues, the underlying chemical and cellular mechanisms for this process are not precisely defined.  Consequently, a biochemical model has been developed in vitro using the well-defined extracellular matrix from the murine Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm (EHS) sarcoma.  Control and experimental samples of EHS basement membranes were irradiated with a Trimedyne argon laser at 500-3,000 Joules/cm2 at 0 degrees C.  The samples were diluted into cold phosphate-buffered saline and allowed to gel at 35 degrees C.  The time course of the gelation reaction was followed in a spectrophotometer at 360 nm.  Irradiation reduced the absorbance 7.5-15% compared to controls and was independent of the dilution over a 10-fold range.  Gelation was also measured by determining the amount of protein by the Bradford assay that could be collected by centrifugation at 10,000g for 10 minutes.  Argon-irradiated samples had 30-40% less protein in the precipitate than the controls.  The addition of 5 mM beta-mercaptoethanol to the EHS extract blocked the effect of the laser on the gelation reaction.  In addition, when gelation was carried out in the absence of calcium and magnesium, there were no differences between laser-treated samples and controls.  The basement membrane proteins were separated by electrophoresis through polyacrylamide gels under denaturing plus reducing or denaturing and non-reducing conditions.  No differences in the polypeptide composition were noted between irradiated and control samples using either Coomassie- or silver-staining techniques.
Cancer mortality in workers exposed to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin   BACKGROUND.  In both animal and epidemiologic studies, exposure to dioxin (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, or TCDD) has been associated with an increased risk of cancer.  METHODS.  We conducted a retrospective cohort study of mortality among the 5172 workers at 12 plants in the United States that produced chemicals contaminated with TCDD.  Occupational exposure was documented by reviewing job descriptions and by measuring TCDD in serum from a sample of 253 workers.  Causes of death were taken from death certificates.  RESULTS.  Mortality from several cancers previously associated with TCDD (stomach, liver, and nasal cancers, Hodgkin's disease, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma) was not significantly elevated in this cohort.  Mortality from soft-tissue sarcoma was increased, but not significantly (4 deaths; standardized mortality ratio [SMR], 338; 95 percent confidence interval, 92 to 865).  In the subcohort of 1520 workers with greater than or equal to 1 year of exposure and greater than or equal to 20 years of latency, however, mortality was significantly increased for soft-tissue sarcoma (3 deaths; SMR, 922; 95 percent confidence interval, 190 to 2695) and for cancers of the respiratory system (SMR, 142; 95 percent confidence interval, 103 to 192).  Mortality from all cancers combined was slightly but significantly elevated in the overall cohort (SMR, 115; 95 percent confidence interval, 102 to 130) and was higher in the subcohort with greater than or equal to 1 year of exposure and greater than or equal to 20 years of latency (SMR, 146; 95 percent confidence interval, 121 to 176).  CONCLUSIONS.  This study of mortality among workers with occupational exposure to TCDD does not confirm the high relative risks reported for many cancers in previous studies.  Conclusions about an increase in the risk of soft-tissue sarcoma are limited by small numbers and misclassification on death certificates.  Excess mortality from all cancers combined, cancers of the respiratory tract, and soft-tissue sarcoma may result from exposure to TCDD, although we cannot exclude the possible contribution of factors such as smoking and occupational exposure to other chemicals.
Comparison of myelography with CT follow-up versus gadolinium MRI for subarachnoid metastatic disease in children.  We evaluated 17 children with primary intracranial neoplasms for subarachnoid metastatic disease (SAMD) using myelography with computed tomographic follow-up (Myelo + CT) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) histopathologic examination, as well as magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium DTPA (MRI + Gd), between December 1988 and December 1989.  There were 12 boys, and the median age was 5.7 years (range, 0.8 to 21.8 years).  Tumor histology included 8 primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs), 3 ependymomas, 2 low-grade astrocytomas, 1 anaplastic astrocytoma, 1 glioblastoma multiforme, 1 atypical rhabdoid tumor, and 1 malignant fibrous histiocytoma.  Thirteen tumors originated in the posterior fossa, 2 were supratentorial, and 2 were in the spinal cord.  The median interval between the 2 diagnostic tests was 2 days.  MRI + Gd was positive in 11 (65%), Myelo + CT in 8 (47%), and CSF in 5 (29%) cases.  MRI + Gd was superior in delineating spinal cord nodules and "sugar coating" whereas Myelo + CT more readily revealed nerve root sleeve filling defects.  There was no case in which Myelo + CT was positive that MRI + Gd did not reveal SAMD.  MRI + Gd is a safe, noninvasive test that should be used as the initial imaging modality for the presence of SAMD.
Salivary flow rates in patients with head and neck cancer 0.5 to 25 years after radiotherapy.  In this clinical study at the University of Texas M.  D.  Anderson Cancer Center, unstimulated and stimulated salivary flow rates were obtained from 47 patients with head and neck cancer who had received mantle, unilateral facial, or bilateral facial field radiotherapy from 0.5 to 25 years earlier.  The magnitude of salivary flow rate reduction compared with a healthy control group was primarily related to the radiation dosage and the amount of salivary gland tissue included in the irradiated fields.  Flow rates were lower for women in all groups, but these differences were not statistically significant.
Intramuscular hemangioma in the oral region: report of three cases.  The occurrence of intramuscular hemangioma in an intraoral or perioral localization is rare, and a thorough knowledge of these tumors is necessary for adequate diagnosis and treatment.  Three cases are presented with discussion, and their histopathology and differential diagnosis are discussed.  An adequate primary excision is necessary to avoid recurrence.
Analysis of interleukin 2 and various effector cell populations in adoptive immunotherapy of 9L rat gliosarcoma: allogeneic cytotoxic T lymphocytes prevent tumor take.  Recombinant interleukin 2 (rIL-2) and various effector cell populations were used for adoptive immunotherapy in the Fischer strain 9L rat gliosarcoma model.  The in vivo cytotoxicities of nonspecifically activated lymphocytes and specifically activated cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) were assessed in a modified in vivo neutralization (Winn) assay.  Effector cells (10(6)) and 9L tumor cells (10(5] were combined with 10(4) units of rIL-2 and stereotactically implanted into the right frontal centrum semiovale of the Fischer (F344) rat.  At 7 and 14 days, additional effector cells (10(6] and rIL-2 (10(4) units) were administered through the same burr hole.  Nonspecifically activated splenocytes were lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells, both plastic-adherent and nonadherent, whereas specifically activated CTLs were either syngeneic (genetically identical) or allogeneic (genetically dissimilar).  Syngeneic CTLs were T lymphocytes from Fischer rats primed in vivo with 9L cells and restimulated in vitro.  Allogeneic CTLs were generated by exposing DA rat lymphocytes either to irradiated Fischer lymph node cells or to 9L Fisher tumor cells in vitro.  Control groups included rats bearing 9L tumor who were untreated, those who received peripheral (i.p.  or s.c.) administration of rIL-2, or those who received syngeneic unstimulated T lymphocytes and rIL-2.  For a set of animals given the same inoculum of 9L tumor, significantly improved survival was shown for groups treated with nonadherent or adherent LAK cells (P less than or equal to 0.0003), syngeneic CTLs (P = 0.0327), or allogeneic CTLs (P = 0.0025) over untreated control animals by using Mantel-Haenzel nonparametric logrank equations.  Only treatment with allogeneic CTLs prevented tumor take.
Activation of early events of the mitogenic response by a P2Y purinoceptor with covalently bound 3'-O-(4-benzoyl)-benzoyladenosine 5'-triphosphate.  3'-O-(4-Benzoyl)benzoyl-ATP (BzATP), a photoaffinity analog of ATP, was used as a ligand for a P2Y purinoceptor (adenine nucleotide receptor) present in intact Swiss 3T3 and 3T6 cells and A-431 epidermoid carcinoma cells.  Photolysis of serum-starved cells in the presence of 10-50 microM BzATP, followed by extensive washing to remove unincorporated BzATP, induced the release of arachidonic acid.  A trace (less than 0.01%) of photoincorporated BzATP was as effective as when 50 microM BzATP or ATP was contained in the incubation medium during the assay.  Photoincorporated BzATP also stimulated the production of prostaglandin E2 and the accumulation of cyclic AMP.  In previous studies, we demonstrated that these three events are obligatory early steps in a pathway leading to DNA synthesis in the above cell lines.  The evidence indicated that the purinoceptor activated by extracellular ATP or BzATP was linked to a pertussis toxin-sensitive GTP-binding protein.  Consistent with these observations, we now find that pertussis toxin inhibits the effect of photoincorporated BzATP on arachidonic acid release.  These results indicate that BzATP is an effective agonist for the P2Y purinoceptor concerned with stimulation of DNA synthesis in 3T3, 3T6, and A-431 cells.  Furthermore, after photolysis it becomes irreversibly associated with intact cells and promotes the activation of early events required for DNA synthesis.
Boron neutron capture therapy of intracerebral rat gliosarcomas.  The efficacy of boron neutron capture therapy (BNCT) for the treatment of intracerebrally implanted rat gliosarcomas was tested.  Preferential accumulation of 10B in tumors was achieved by continuous infusion of the sulfhydryl borane dimer, Na4(10)B24H22S2, at a rate of 45-50 micrograms of 10B per g of body weight per day from day 11 to day 14 after tumor initiation (day 0).  This infusion schedule resulted in average blood 10B concentrations of 35 micrograms/ml in a group of 12 gliosarcoma-bearing rats and 45 micrograms/ml in a group of 10 similar gliosarcoma-bearing rats treated by BNCT.  Estimated tumor 10B levels in these two groups were 26 and 34 micrograms/g, respectively.  On day 14, boron-treated and non-boron-treated rats were exposed to 5.0 or 7.5 MW.min of radiation from the Brookhaven Medical Research Reactor that yielded thermal neutron fluences of approximately 2.0 x 10(12) or approximately 3.0 x 10(12) n/cm2, respectively, in the tumors.  Untreated rats had a median postinitiation survival time of 21 days.  Reactor radiation alone increased median postinitiation survival time to 26 (5.0 MW.min) or 28 (7.5 MW.min) days.  The 12 rats that received 5 MW.min of BNCT had a median postinitiation survival time of 60 days.  Two of these animals survived greater than 15 months.  In the 7.5 MW.min group, the median survival time is not calculable since 6 of the 10 animals remain alive greater than 10 months after BNCT.  The estimated radiation doses to tumors in the two BNCT groups were 14.2 and 25.6 Gy equivalents, respectively.  Similar gliosarcoma-bearing rats treated with 15.0 or 22.5 Gy of 250-kilovolt peak x-rays had median survival times of only 26 or 31 days, respectively, after tumor initiation.
Identification of transforming growth factor beta family members present in bone-inductive protein purified from bovine bone.  Characterization of the polypeptides present in bone-inductive protein extracts from bovine bone has led to the cloning of seven regulatory molecules, six of which are distantly related to transforming growth factor beta.  The three human bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) we describe herein, BMP-5, BMP-6, and BMP-7, show extensive sequence similarity to BMP-2, a molecule that by itself is sufficient to induce de novo bone formation in vivo.  The additive or synergistic contribution of these BMP-2-related molecules to the osteogenic activity associated with demineralized bone is strongly implicated by the presence of these growth factors in the most active fractions of highly purified bone extract.
Adenovirus 12S E1A gene represses differentiation of F9 teratocarcinoma cells.  The F9 teratocarcinoma cell line differentiates in vitro after treatment with retinoic acid and cAMP and has been a widely used model system for the study of the molecular events that are responsible for cellular commitment and differentiation during early development.  Previous experiments have suggested intriguing parallels between the control of gene expression during F9 cell differentiation and the regulation of gene expression by adenovirus E1A.  Transfection of a 12S E1A-expressing plasmid into terminally differentiated, nonproliferating F9 cells generates, at high frequency, colonies of dividing cells, each of which expresses E1A.  Cell lines established from these colonies proliferate in the presence of retinoic acid and have lost the fully differentiated phenotype as characterized by the absence of expression of a series of differentiation-specific genes.  We conclude that expression of the viral 12S E1A gene product interferes with retinoic acid-induced F9 cell differentiation.  Moreover, the results suggest that the differentiation process, as defined by markers of terminal differentiation, may not be a permanent event but can be reversed by E1A expression.
Frequent mutation of the p53 gene in human esophageal cancer.  Sequence alterations in the p53 gene have been detected in human tumors of the brain, breast, lung, and colon, and it has been proposed that p53 mutations spanning a major portion of the coding region inactivate the tumor suppressor function of this gene.  To our knowledge, neither transforming mutations in oncogenes nor mutations in tumor suppressor genes have been reported in human esophageal tumors.  We examined four human esophageal carcinoma cell lines and 14 human esophageal squamous cell carcinomas by polymerase chain reaction amplification and direct sequencing for the presence of p53 mutations in exons 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9.  Two cell lines and five of the tumor specimens contained a mutated allele (one frameshift and six missense mutations).  All missense mutations detected occurred at G.C base pairs in codons at or adjacent to mutations previously reported in other cancers.  The identification of aberrant p53 gene alleles in one-third of the tumors we tested suggests that mutations at this locus are common genetic events in the pathogenesis of squamous cell carcinomas of the esophagus.
Activation of erythropoietin receptors by Friend viral gp55 and by erythropoietin and down-modulation by the murine Fv-2r resistance gene.  The leukemogenic membrane glycoprotein (gp55) encoded by Friend spleen focus-forming virus appears to bind to erythropoietin receptors (EpoR) sto stimulate erythroblastosis [Li, J.-P., D'Andrea, A.D., Lodish, H.F.  & Baltimore, D.  (1990) Nature (London) 343, 762-764].  To directly compare the effects of gp55 with erythropoietin (Epo), we produced retrovirions that encode either gp55, Epo, or EpoR.  After infection with EpoR virus, interleukin 3-dependent DA-3 cells bound 125I-labeled Epo and grew without interleukin 3 in the presence of Epo.  These latter cells, but not parental DA-3 cells, became factor-independent after superinfection either with Epo virus or with Friend spleen focus-forming virus.  In addition, Epo virus caused a disease in mice that mimicked Friend erythroleukemia.  Although Fv-2r homozygotes are susceptible to all other retroviral diseases, they are resistant to both Epo viral and Friend viral erythroleukemias.  These results indicate that both gp55 and Epo stimulate EpoR and that the Fv-2 gene encodes a protein that controls response to these ligands.  However, the Fv-2 protein is not EpoR because the corresponding genes map to opposite ends of mouse chromosome 9.  These results have important implications for understanding signal transduction by EpoR and the role of host genetic variation in controlling susceptibility to an oncogenic protein.
Adenocarcinoma of the colon and rectum in patients less than 40 years of age.  From 1962 to 1988, 50 of 801 patients with adenocarcinoma of the colon and rectum treated at the National Naval Medical Center were less than 40 years old.  Symptoms were present in 47 of the younger patients at presentation.  The mean duration of time from the onset of symptoms to diagnosis in this group was 4.9 months.  Risk factors for carcinoma of the colon and rectum were identified in 14 of 50 patients less than 40 years old.  A significantly greater proportion of patients less than 40 years old had Stage C disease compared with the older group of patients (42 versus 22 per cent, p = 0.014).  Stage B disease was more common in patients more than 40 years of age (44.8 versus 26.0 per cent, p = 0.014).  The proportion of patients with Stages A and D disease was similar in both age groups.  The cumulative survival rate in this group at five and ten years was 43 and 34 per cent, respectively.  The five year survival rate in patients less than 40 years old with Stage B disease was 76 per cent and with Stage C disease, 37 per cent.  All young patients with Stage D disease were dead at 28 months.  Synchronous and metachronous carcinomas of the colon and rectum were uncommon in patients less than 40 years old.  Patients less than 40 years of age with carcinoma of the colon and rectum are usually symptomatic and have advanced disease at the time of presentation.  Survival time for these patients for each stage of disease is similar to the over-all population of patients with carcinoma of the colon and rectum.
The oncologic risks of skin preservation at mastectomy when combined with immediate reconstruction of the breast.  Most oncologic surgeons agree that removal of the nipple, the areola and any recent scar at the site of the biopsy is necessary during a mastectomy for treatment of carcinoma of the breast.  There is less agreement about what should be done with the remaining uninvolved mammary skin.  Its preservation facilitates the performance of immediate reconstruction of the breast and can lead to improved aesthetic results, but many oncologists fear that this practice could lead to an increased incidence of local tumor recurrence.  To determine if that fear was justified, 87 patients who had undergone unilateral or bilateral mastectomy with immediate reconstruction for treatment of early carcinoma of the breast were studied.  Preservation of uninvolved skin was used in all instances.  All patients had a documented follow-up study of 12 months or more; the average follow-up time was 23.1 months.  One peripheral local recurrence was observed.  This 1.2 per cent rate of early local recurrence is lower than that reported from several series using modified radical mastectomy without skin preservation or immediate reconstruction, and suggests that skin preservation does not confer additional risks of local recurrence of carcinoma of the breast in properly selected patients.
Gastric lymphoma.  From 1976 to 1988, 35 patients were treated for Stage IE and Stage IIE primary gastric lymphoma (non-Hodgkin's).  Pain and weight loss were the predominant symptoms, physical findings were usually absent and 20 per cent of the patients were anemic.  The results of gastrointestinal contrast studies suggested a malignant condition in 75 per cent, but findings were not specific for lymphoma.  Endoscopic findings suggested a malignant process in 85 per cent, but the yield for biopsy was only 60 per cent.  Of 28 patients undergoing operative exploration, 75 per cent were resectable.  Nine patients received postresectional adjuvant therapy.  Five had chemotherapy; three, radiotherapy, and one patient, a combination of the two.  Primary nonsurgical treatment consisted of chemotherapy in 11, radiotherapy in two and combined therapy in one instance.  Three of five recurrences were successfully treated.  The five year survival rate was 65 per cent without significant differences between surgical and nonsurgical regimens.  Those with tumors smaller than 7 centimeters had a five year survival rate of 100 per cent versus 50 per cent for larger neoplasms.  Patients more than 60 years of age appeared to have a more favorable course after surgical therapy compared with those who had nonsurgical treatment.  We concluded that endoscopy is a most useful, although limited diagnostic study and since no treatment program is obviously superior, the choice of therapy can be individualized accordingly.
Nutritional approach to cancer prevention with emphasis on vitamins, antioxidants, and carotenoids.  The main human cancers are associated with complex life-style related causative, enhancing, and inhibiting factors.  Tobacco smoking or chewing exposes humans to genotoxic carcinogens and to promoting substances.  Likewise, Western dietary traditions involve certain carcinogens and promoters, whereas Oriental traditions implicate other carcinogens and promoters.  Importantly, in virtually all situations regular intake of fruits and vegetables appreciably lowers the risk of cancer.  This paper reviews the causes of the main human cancers and analyzes the mechanisms of the protective effects of fruits and vegetables.  Prevention of human cancer requires the definition of optimal levels of recommended daily allowances of micronutrients.
Vegetables, fruits, and carotenoids and the risk of cancer.  Low intake of vegetables, fruits, and carotenoids is consistently associated with increased risk of lung cancer in both prospective and retrospective studies.  In addition, low levels of beta-carotene in serum or plasma are consistently associated with the subsequent development of lung cancer.  The simplest explanation is that beta-carotene is protective.  Since retinol (preformed vitamin A) is not related in a similar manner to lung cancer risk, beta-carotene appears to function through a mechanism that does not require conversion into vitamin A.  However, the importance of other carotenoids and other constituents of vegetables and fruit has not been adequately explored.  Both prospective and retrospective studies suggest that vegetable and fruit intake may reduce the risk of cancers of the mouth, pharynx, larynx, esophagus, stomach, colon, rectum, bladder, and cervix.  But because of fewer studies and less consistency among studies, the epidemiologic evidence is at present less persuasive than for lung cancer.
Prediagnostic serum levels of carotenoids and vitamin E as related to subsequent cancer in Washington County, Maryland.  In 1974 and 1975, serum specimens were collected from 25,802 volunteers in Washington County, Maryland.  The serum was kept frozen at -73 degrees C until the time of assay.  Prediagnostic samples from 436 cancer cases and 765 matched control subjects have been assayed.  Nine sites have been studied: colon, rectum, pancreas, lung, melanoma, basal cell of skin, breast, prostate, and bladder.  Serum beta-carotene levels showed a strong protective association with lung cancer, suggestive protective associations with melanoma and bladder cancer, and a suggestive but nonprotective association with rectal cancer.  Serum vitamin E levels had a protective association with lung cancer; none of the other sites showed impressive associations.  Low levels of serum lycopene were strongly associated with pancreatic cancer and less strongly associated with cancer of the bladder and rectum.
Vitamin C and cancer prevention: the epidemiologic evidence.  Epidemiologic evidence of a protective effect of vitamin C for non-hormone-dependent cancers is strong.  Of the 46 such studies in which a dietary vitamin C index was calculated, 33 found statistically significant protection, with high intake conferring approximately a twofold protective effect compared with low intake.  Of 29 additional studies that assessed fruit intake, 21 found significant protection.  For cancers of the esophagus, larynx, oral cavity, and pancreas, evidence for a protective effect of vitamin C or some component in fruit is strong and consistent.  For cancers of the stomach, rectum, breast, and cervix there is also strong evidence.  Several recent lung cancer studies found significant protective effects of vitamin C or of foods that are better sources of vitamin C than of beta-carotene.  It is likely that ascorbic acid, carotenoids, and other factors in fruits and vegetables act jointly.  Increased consumption of fruits and vegetables in general should be encouraged.
Vitamin E and cancer prevention.  Some animal experiments and human studies suggest that vitamin E may protect against cancer.  Serum alpha-tocopherol concentration was studied for its prediction of cancer in a cohort of 36,265 adults in Finland.  During a mean follow-up of 8 y, cancer was diagnosed in 766 persons.  The levels of serum alpha-tocopherol were determined from stored serum samples (at -20 degrees C) taken from these cancer patients and from 1419 matched control subjects.  Individuals with a low level of alpha-tocopherol had about a 1.5-fold risk of cancer compared with those with a higher level.  The strength of the association between serum alpha-tocopherol level and cancer risk varied for different cancer sites and was strongest for some gastrointestinal cancers and for the combined group of cancers unrelated to smoking.  The association was strongest among nonsmoking men and among women with low levels of serum selenium.  The findings agree with the hypothesis that dietary vitamin E in some circumstances protects against cancer.
Gastric juice ascorbic acid: effects of disease and implications for gastric carcinogenesis.  N-nitroso compounds (NOC) are strongly implicated in the causation of cancer of the stomach and it has been suggested that ascorbic acid might reduce the risk of gastric cancer by preventing their formation within gastric juice.  However, until recently there have been no measurements of gastric juice ascorbic acid concentrations.  We have measured both gastric juice ascorbic and total vitamin C (ascorbic acid and dehydroascorbic acid).  Our findings suggest that ascorbic acid is secreted into the gastric lumen so that gastric juice concentrations are often greater than those in plasma.  Gastric pathology affects this secretion, leading to values in gastric juice that are lower than plasma levels.  Stimulation of gastric secretion does not raise vitamin C concentrations in individuals whose values are initially low.  The role of ascorbic acid in preventing formation of NOC and protecting against gastric cancer is discussed in the light of these findings.
Interaction of chloramphenicol and metabolites with colony stimulating factors: possible role in chloramphenicol-induced bone marrow injury.  We have recently demonstrated that two chloramphenicol (CAP) metabolites known to be produced by intestinal bacteria, dehydro-CAP (DH-CAP) and nitrophenylaminopropane (NPAP), are much more cytotoxic to bone marrow in vitro than CAP itself.  Since colony stimulating factors (CSFs) play an essential role in hematopoietic cell growth, toxicity from CAP metabolites could also involve interaction with CSF or CSF-producing cells.  In the present study, we found that increasing concentrations of rhGM-CSF or rhG-CSF completely reversed the inhibitory effect of CAP (2 x 10(-4) M) on human CFU-GM growth and on the growth of KG-1 cells.  GM-CSF also reversed the inhibitory effect of CAP on HL-60 cells.  Inhibition by DH-CAP (50% at 5 x 10(-7) M), nitroso-CAP (NO-CAP) (60% at 5 x 10(-6) M) and NPAP (35% at 10(-5) M) was not affected by either CSF.  In addition to their inhibitory effect on cell growth, DH-CAP (5 x 10(-6) M) and NO-CAP (5 x 10(-6) M) inhibited CSF production by buffy coat cells 50-70% without affecting cell viability.  Neither CAP nor NPAP inhibited CSF production.  It is suggested that the dual toxic-inhibitory effect of some intestinal metabolites of CAP such as DH-CAP on hematopoietic cell growth on the one hand, and on CSF production on the other, renders them very potent as potential mediators of CAP induced aplastic anemia.
Kaposi's sarcoma involvement of the bone marrow.  Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) is a predominantly cutaneous malignancy with several clinical variants.  Extracutaneous sites of involvement are uncommon in all disease variants except epidemic KS (human immunodeficiency virus related) and the African lymphadenopathic variant.  Extracutaneous KS usually involves the lymph nodes, gastrointestinal tract, and respiratory tract.  The authors report the first description of a patient with classic KS to have bone marrow involvement.  Two additional patients with KS variants and bone marrow involvement have been described.  Bone marrow tumor invasion should be considered in patients with KS and hematologic abnormalities.
Ethanol causes accelerated G1 arrest in differentiating HL-60 cells.  The effects of clinically relevant ethanol concentrations on myeloid differentiation in the HL-60 cell promyelocytic leukemia line have been studied.  The exposure of noninduced stem cells to 60 mM ethanol results in an increase in G1 cells, but there is no increase in superoxide production or expression of the Mo1 antigen.  When HL-60 cells are induced to differentiate along the myeloid line with dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) or retinoic acid (RA), there is a shift to smaller cell size, an increase in G1 cells and acquisition of the ability to produce superoxide as reported previously by several authors.  When ethanol is present during differentiation, there are further increases in G1 cells, and increases in the percentage of cells which produce superoxide and express Mo1, and decreases in mean cell size and total growth during the incubation period.  Regrowth experiments after periods of differentiation indicate that the increased G1 arrest seen in the presence of ethanol represents terminal commitment if inducer is present, but in the absence of inducer the increased G1 percentage is readily reversible.  Examination of RNA content by flow cytometry reveals a decrease in both the peak and mean G1 RNA content during DMSO or RA induced differentiation.  These decreases are accentuated by the presence of ethanol, resulting in a higher G1A/G1B ratio than in nonexposed cells.  These findings indicate that ethanol enhances G1 growth arrest in HL-60 cells exposed to myeloid inducers.  Partial differentiation occurs during this process, resulting in terminally arrested cells, some of which have undergone fewer postinduction cell divisions than normal and may not be fully competent.
Magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography in pediatric head and neck masses.  Fifty-three magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 25 computed tomography (CT) studies of 53 head and neck masses in pediatric patients were reviewed retrospectively.  All lesions had pathologic proof except for 2 metastatic and 2 recurrent lesions, which only had prior pathologic confirmation at their primary sites.  These included 12 malignant tumors, 23 benign tumors, 6 inflammatory masses, and 12 congenital lesions.  The MRI performance ranged predominantly from good to excellent in detection of the lesion and the extent of involvement and in contrast to the surrounding tissue; when CT comparison was available, MRI proved to be equal to or better than it in detection of these factors and in preoperative diagnosis.  Our results suggest that MRI should be the method of choice for the initial evaluation of the pediatric head and neck region, especially in those patients requiring multiple examinations.  However, CT and MRI should be used conjunctively in complicated cases, especially those possibly involving lesions with calcifications or bony involvement.
Hemangioma of the temporalis muscle.  A rare case of an intramuscular hemangioma of the temporalis muscle is reported.  The clinical examination, carotid arteriogram, computed tomographic scan, and aspiration cytology suggested the vascular nature of the tumor, but an exact diagnosis could only be made after histopathologic examination.  Temporary occlusion of the ipsilateral external carotid artery and subperiosteal dissection permitted complete, wide excision without much bleeding.
Synthesis of type I collagen in healing wounds in humans.  To quantify wound healing in surgical patients, samples of wound fluid were collected through a silicone rubber tube for 7 postoperative days and their concentrations of the carboxyterminal propeptide of type I procollagen (PICP) and the aminoterminal propeptide of type III procollagen (PIIINP) were measured with specific radioimmunoassays.  The mean concentration of PICP in would fluid on day 1 was 207 +/- 92 (SD) micrograms/L, and on day 2 908 +/- 469 micrograms/L (p less than 0.001, signed rank test).  On day 7, the mean concentration reached was 380 times higher than that of day 1 (79,330 +/- 54,151 micrograms/L).  Only one peak of PICP antigenicity, corresponding to the intact propeptide as set free during synthesis of type I procollagen, was detected on Sephacryl S-300 gel filtration analysis of wound fluid samples.  The mean concentration of PIIINP was 70 +/- 61 micrograms/L on day 1, 86 +/- 88 micrograms/L on day 2, and 180 +/- 129 micrograms/L on day 3 (p less than 0.001 when compared with day 1).  Finally on day 7, a 250-fold concentration (17,812 +/- 9839 micrograms/L), compared with day 1, was reached.  Methods described in the present paper allow separate and repetitive quantification of the synthesis of both type I and type III procollagen during human wound healing.
Rectus abdominis muscle flap with microvascular anastomoses for repair of recurrent sarcoma.  After radical resection of a recurrent leiomyosarcoma, the thoracic wall was stabilized with a Gore-Tex graft.  The skin and soft tissue defect was repaired with a large rectus abdominis flap in which the circulation was secured by end-to-end microvascular anastomosis of the inferior epigastric artery to the internal mammary artery, which had to be cut during tumor removal.
The impact of physician compliance on screening mammography for older women.  Screening mammography is underutilized, even for women older than 50 years for whom there is a general consensus that regular annual screening is appropriate and necessary.  To evaluate reasons for this underutilization, we studied a random sample of 517 women in Los Angeles, Calif who were older than 50 years.  All women were found to be underscreened, especially women older than 65 years.  For example, approximately 35% of women 50 to 64 years old and 47% of women aged 65 years and older never had had even one mammogram.  Analyses revealed that the most important factor that predicted whether a women ever had had a mammogram was whether her physician had talked to her about mammography.  Women were between four and 12 times more likely, depending on their age group, to have had a mammogram at some time if their physicians discussed it with them.  The discussions did not need to be lengthy or complex.  These results indicate that physicians need to know that discussing screening mammography with their patients has a major impact on breast cancer screening behaviors.
The relationship of Papanicolaou testing and contacts with the medical care system to stage at diagnosis of cervical cancer.  The relationship of Papanicolaou (Pap) testing and physician visits to stage at diagnosis of cervical cancer was assessed by interviews with 149 women with invasive cervical cancer and 214 women with in situ cervical cancer.  A significantly smaller percent of study subjects with invasive disease than in situ disease had at least one Pap test in the 3 years prior to diagnosis (age- and race-adjusted odds ratio: 3.38).  The two groups did not differ in visits to a physician for other reasons during this period.  Pap testing decreased with increasing age for both groups, but not physician visits.  While 65% percent of the subjects with invasive disease aged between 65 and 79 years had never had a Pap test until diagnosis, 88% had seen a physician in the preceding 3 years.  Women with regional or distant invasive disease were least likely to have had Pap tests, and, within this group, those aged between 35 and 64 years were also least likely to have seen a physician.  Strategies for early detection must reflect missed opportunities and the need to bring those not receiving care into the system.
Decreased mortality in users of estrogen replacement therapy   In a prospective study of 8881 postmenopausal female residents of a retirement community in southern California, we evaluated in detail the relationship between estrogen use and overall mortality.  After 7 1/2 years of follow-up, there had been 1447 deaths.  Women with a history of estrogen use had 20% lower age-adjusted, all-cause mortality than lifetime nonusers (95% confidence interval, 0.70 to 0.87).  Mortality decreased with increasing duration of use and was lower among current users than among women who used estrogens only in the distant past.  Current users with more than 15 years of estrogen use had a 40% reduction in their overall mortality.  Among oral estrogen users, relative risks of death could not be distinguished by specific dosages of the oral estrogen taken for the longest time.  Women who had used estrogen replacement therapy had a reduced mortality from all categories of acute and chronic arteriosclerotic disease and cerebrovascular disease.  This group of women had a reduced mortality from cancer, although this reduction was not statistically significant.  The mortality from all remaining causes combined was the same in estrogen users and lifetime nonusers.
Combined hepatic and vena caval resection with autogenous caval graft replacement.  Right-sided and caudate hepatic lobectomy with resection of the retrohepatic vena cava were performed in a 34-year-old woman with recurrent adrenal carcinoma.  The vena cava was replaced with a graft constructed from autogenous superficial femoral vein.  Included herein is a review of the literature detailing the three previously reported cases of combined hepatic and caval resection; to our knowledge, there are no prior reports of the use of an autogenous vein graft in this setting.  With surgical and anesthetic techniques, including total vascular exclusion of the liver and venovenous bypass, methods that were developed in large part through experience in liver transplantation, this type of surgery can be performed with a high rate of success.
Photodynamic therapy to treat tumors of the extrahepatic biliary ducts. A case report.  The poor survival rate of patients with extrahepatic bile duct tumors is well documented.  Over the course of 4 years, we treated a white woman with diabetes diagnosed with histologically proven adenocarcinoma of the common bile duct with six injections of dihematoporphyrin ether followed by seven photodynamic therapy treatments to the biliary duct.  As of July 1989, the patient was still alive, was not jaundiced, and had a Karnofsky performance status of 70.  No changes occurred in any blood chemistry value from the time of injection to the time of photodynamic therapy.  Of the transient elevations of some blood chemistry values and the white blood cell count, which occurred within 24 to 48 hours after photodynamic therapy, only those of alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and amylase were significant.
Pigmented spindle cell naevus.  We report 22 cases of pigmented spindle cell naevus (PSCN).  The usual appearance of these naevi is that of a heavily pigmented papule found mostly on the legs of young patients.  Histologically, PSCN was characterized by symmetrical proliferation of spindle-shaped pigmented melanocytes grouped in large junctional nests.  Pagetoid spread of single cells in the overlying epidermis was frequently found.  In our opinion, PSCN is a distinctive benign acquired melanocytic naevus that in the past has been frequently misdiagnosed as atypical Spitz naevi or malignant melanoma.
Factor XIIIa in nodular malignant melanoma and Spitz naevi.  The distribution of factor XIIIa-positive dermal dendritic cells was studied in a series of nodular malignant melanomas and compared with that seen in Spitz naevi.  Two patterns of distribution were recognizable: (a) diffusely spread through the tumour and (b) located mainly at the periphery of the tumour.  These did not correlate with the diagnosis of melanoma or Spitz naevus and the distribution appeared to be a function of growth pattern of the tumour.  The diffuse pattern was the most common regardless of diagnosis and the distribution of factor XIIIa-positive cells is the same in malignant melanoma and Spitz naevi.
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor synergizes with interleukin-6 in supporting the proliferation of human myeloma cells.  The role of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) in the growth of multiple myeloma (MM) was investigated in 21 patients with MM.  In 17 patients with proliferating myeloma cells in vivo, recombinant GM-CSF significantly increased the endogenous-IL-6-mediated spontaneous myeloma cell proliferation occurring in 5-day cultures of tumor cells in vitro (P less than .01).  Furthermore, GM-CSF was detected in 5-day culture supernatants of myeloma bone marrow cells.  This endogenous GM-CSF was produced by the myeloma bone marrow microenvironment but not by myeloma cells and contributed to the spontaneous myeloma-cell proliferation observed in 5-day cultures.  In fact, this proliferation was partially blocked (67%) by anti-GM-CSF monoclonal antibodies.  The stimulatory effect of rGM-CSF was mediated through IL-6 because it was abrogated by anti-IL-6 monoclonal antibodies.  rGM-CSF did not reproducibly increase the endogenous IL-6 production in short-term cultures of bone marrow cells of MM patients.  Using an IL-6-dependent myeloma cell line (XG-1 cell line), rGM-CSF was shown to act directly on myeloma cells stimulating by twofold their IL-6 responsiveness.  rGM-CSF did not induce any IL-6 production in XG-1 cells, nor was it able to sustain their growth alone.  Although no detectable GM-CSF levels were found in the peripheral or bone marrow blood of MM patients, it is possible that GM-CSF, produced locally by the tumoral environment, enhances the IL-6 responsiveness of myeloma cells in vivo in a way similar to that reported here in vitro.
Retroviral transformation of cerebral microvascular endothelial cells: macrophage-like and microvascular endothelial cell properties.  We report that L-cell-conditioned medium (LCM) transforms porcine cerebral microvascular (PCMV) endothelial cells into cells with macrophage-like properties.  LCM is known to contain both cytokine(s) and the L-cell virus, a murine retrovirus found in the L929 cell and LCM.  Our evidence suggests that both LCM cytokine(s) and the L-cell virus are involved in this PCMV endothelial cell transformation.  Criteria for transformation include focus formation, decreased serum requirements for growth, changes in morphology including nonadherence, propagation in suspension culture, and a decreased growth response to stimulation with a known endothelial cell mitogen.  Macrophage-like characteristics of this transformed cell, designated as RVTE, include pinocytosis of low-density lipoprotein, Fc receptor-mediated phagocytosis, phagocytosis of bacteria and zymosan, the expression of macrophage enzyme markers, and constitutive production of colony-stimulating factor 1.  However, the transformed cell retains several properties of the nontransformed cell including the expression of FVIII:RAg and in vitro self-organization into capillary-like structures.  Cloning of RVTE cells clearly shows that both macrophage-like and cerebral microvascular endothelial cell properties are present in the same cell.  During self-organization, nontransformed cells express morphologic and functional characteristics classically associated with the macrophage.  These findings suggest that some brain capillary pathophysiologies could involve macrophage-like cerebral microvascular endothelial cells.  Furthermore, the "reticuloendothelial" phenotypic repertoire expressed by this transformed cerebral microvascular endothelial cell may show that the cerebral capillary endothelial cell in vivo is derived from a hematopoietic and/or phagocytic precursor.
Consistent involvement of the bcr gene by 9;22 breakpoints in pediatric acute leukemias.  To investigate the relationship of bcr-abl fusion mRNAs with childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALL), we examined 27 pediatric Philadelphia chromosome (Ph1)-positive acute leukemias using a reverse polymerase chain reaction (PCR) procedure.  In cells from 24 leukemias, single bcr-abl PCR products were detected that corresponded to breakpoints in the minor breakpoint cluster region (mbcr in intron 1 of the bcr gene) associated with production of the P190 fusion protein.  Cells from the three remaining leukemias contained breakpoints in the major breakpoint cluster region (Mbcr) as shown by PCR and Southern blot analyses.  These three leukemias also contained low levels of the mbcr PCR product that may have resulted from alternative splicing of the bcr-abl precursor RNA.  A screen of 35 additional leukemias from patients who failed therapy before day 180 (induction failures or early relapses) found one case with unsuccessful cytogenetics to express Mbcr-abl RNA.  All four children with Mbcr breakpoints had white blood cell levels in excess of 250,000 at presentation (compared with 2 of 24 with mbcr breakpoints) and two had hematologic and clinical features suggestive of chronic myelogenous leukemias (CML) in lymphoid blast crisis.  Our results indicate that in Ph1-positive pediatric leukemias, all 9;22 breakpoints occur in one of the two known breakpoint cluster regions in the bcr gene on chromosome 22.  The reverse PCR reliably detected all patients with cytogenetic t(9;22) and is capable of detecting additional Ph1-positive leukemias that are missed by standard cytogenetics.  Furthermore, the Mbcr-type breakpoint, associated with production of p210, can be seen in childhood leukemias presenting either as clinical ALL or as apparent lymphoid blast crisis of CML, suggesting that t(9;22) breakpoint locations do not exclusively determine the biologic and clinical features of pediatric Ph1-positive ALL.
Synergistic inhibition by verapamil and quinine of P-glycoprotein-mediated multidrug resistance in a human myeloma cell line model.  In an effort to develop a clinically useful approach to overcoming P-glycoprotein-mediated multidrug resistance (MDR1), we evaluated combined chemosensitization with verapamil and quinine in a multidrug-resistant (MDR) human myeloma cell line model.  In clonogenic assay, verapamil was used at concentrations from 0.1 to 1.0 micrograms/mL, bracketing the plasma levels achieved by oral administration and high-dose intravenous (IV) infusion, respectively.  The dose of quinine was held constant at 1.0 micrograms/mL, a plasma concentration readily achieved by oral administration.  At each dose level of verapamil tested, the combination with quinine proved more effective than either drug individually in reversing resistance to doxorubicin and vinblastine and synergistic chemosensitizing interaction was observed.  Verapamil at 0.1 microgram/mL combined with quinine was capable of restoring sensitivity to doxorubicin fully and reduced resistance to vinblastine as effectively as verapamil alone at 1.0 micrograms/mL.  Furthermore, the combination of 1.0 mumol verapamil with 10 mumols quinine increased accumulation and retention of anthracycline in the resistant cells to a greater extent than did either drug individually (P less than .001) and inhibited drug efflux as effectively as verapamil alone at 10 mumols.  Our findings suggest that combined chemosensitization with verapamil and quinine may prove useful for overcoming MDR1 in patients with drug-refractory B-cell neoplasms such as multiple myeloma or non-Hodgkin's lymphomas.
Anti-CD33 monoclonal antibody and etoposide/cytosine arabinoside combinations for the ex vivo purification of bone marrow in acute nonlymphocytic leukemia.  Pharmacologic and immunologic methods of ex-vivo bone marrow (BM) purging for acute nonlymphocytic leukemia (ANLL) were combined to augment the effect of either method alone.  Etoposide (VP16; 20 to 30 micrograms/mL) with or without cytosine arabinoside (Ara C; 10 mg/mL) was used in tandem with the anti-CD33 monoclonal antibody (MoAb), MY9, chosen because CD33 is found on the stem cell pool in the majority of patients with ANLL.  The agents were tested singly or sequentially, with a 1-hour incubation of the drugs preceding complement-mediated lysis using MY9.  VP16 combined with Ara C killed up to 3.9 +/- 0.3 and 5.11 +/- 0.4 logs of the human ANLL cell lines HL60 and K562 at drug concentrations that killed only 1.2 +/- 0.1 logs of normal committed granulocyte/macrophage stem cells (CFU-GM).  Adding a single exposure of the MY9 and complement (C') to the drug-treated cells, greater than 5.4 logs of HL60 were killed.  Similar to other pharmacologic agents, no differential kill for clonagenic leukemic cells (colony-forming unit-leukemia; CFU-L) from patients with ANLL was seen for drug only treated blasts versus normal CFU-granulocyte-macrophage (CFU-GM), with less than 1 log CFU-L kill at drug concentrations that spared 1 log of CFU-GM.  Similarly, only 1.1 +/- 0.3 logs of ANLL CFU-L were eliminated using MY9 and C'.  However, with the sequential VP16/Ara C----MY9 + C' treatment, synergy was demonstrated and 2.6 +/- 0.3 logs of CFU-L were eliminated.  Because CD33 is also found on the normal CFU-GM pool, two-stage long-term BM cultures were performed to determine pluripotent stem cell elimination by the drug/MoAb purging combination.  No difference of CFU-GM or BFU-E production at 4 to 6 weeks of culture for VP16/Ara C, MY9 + C', or VP16/AraC----My9 + C' treated cells was seen compared with untreated controls indicating sparing of early progenitor cells.  Sequential ex vivo treatment of human ANLL CFU-L with VP16/Ara C followed by complement-mediated lysis using MY9 synergistically kills CFU-L while sparing early normal hematopoietic progenitor cells, and thus may be a more effective way to purge BM than either alone.
Flow cytometry for clinical estimation of circulating hematopoietic progenitors for autologous transplantation in cancer patients.  Optimum methods of harvesting circulating hematopoietic progenitors for autologous transplantation to support myeloablative cancer therapy are still uncertain, mostly because of the lack of an assay for marrow-repopulating stem cells.  The CFU-GM assay, the commonly used indirect indicator of the quality of the graft, is poorly standardized and provides results evaluable only retrospectively.  Based on the knowledge that hematopoietic progenitors express CD34 and CD33 differentiation antigens, we developed a dual-color direct immunofluorescence flow cytometry assay with the aim of replacing the CFU-GM assay advantageously.  For this purpose, we applied both assays to 157 blood samples obtained daily throughout 20 different recoveries from pancytopenia induced by high-dose cyclophosphamide or etoposide cancer therapy with or without recombinant human GM colony-stimulating factor (rhGM-CSF).  The appearance of CD34+ cells in the circulation indicated that hematopoietic progenitors had increased to more than 500 CFU-GM/mL, a level clinically adequate for large-scale harvest by leukapheresis.  Total CD34+ cells correlated well with CFU-GM (r = .89), and data could be fitted by a linear regression line described by the equation y = 388.3 + 64.0x, where y = CFU-GM/mL and x = CD34+ cells per microliter.  Moreover, in a series of six patients treated with myeloablative chemoradiotherapy, early hematopoietic recovery of marrow functions was predicted more accurately by the number of transplanted CD34+/CD33+ cells than by either total nucleated cells, CFU-GM, CD34+/CD33- cells, or CD34-/CD33+ cells.  Data presented in this article favor clinical use of the CD34/CD33 flow cytometry assay to guide harvesting of circulating hematopoietic progenitors for autologous transplantation and contribute to better understanding of the role played by circulating hematopoietic progenitor cell subsets in marrow recovery after myeloablative cancer therapy.
Variability in DNA measurements in multiple tumor samples of human colonic carcinoma.  The DNA ploidy and cell-cycle distribution of three separate fresh tissue samples of 60 colorectal adenocarcinomas were analyzed by flow cytometry.  DNA ploidy was concordant among the three samples in 38 cases (63.3%).  In the remaining 22 cases (36.6%), the DNA histograms of two of the three multiple samples were similar; however, the ploidy of the third sample was discordant.  No relationship was observed between Dukes' stage and histologic grade with concordance or discordance among samples.  Thus, in about one third of the colonic carcinomas, a single sample showing either a diploid or diploid-cycling DNA histogram would not detect aneuploid DNA patterns.  Comparison of scrapes and fine-needle aspirates of tumors as alternative sampling methods of tumors for DNA ploidy analysis indicated a strong association with the tumor ploidy (84% and 96%, respectively) only when the ploidy of the multiple samples was concordant.  In about 25% of the cases, tumor scrapes and fine-needle aspirates did not correlate with the "most abnormal" ploidy observed in one of the three tissue samples.  The data suggest that single or even double tissue samples may not show aneuploid DNA patterns in a substantial proportion of colorectal cancers.
Usefulness of serum glycoconjugates in precancerous and cancerous diseases of the oral cavity.  Sera from 47 healthy controls, 18 normal individuals with the habit of tobacco chewing, 43 patients with oral precancerous (PC) conditions, and 40 patients with oral cancer (OC) were studied for the levels of total sialic acid (TSA), lipid-bound sialic acid (LSA), mucoid proteins, and protein-bound hexoses (PBH) (galactose and mannose).  The changes in the glycoconjugate levels were insignificant between the controls and the normal tobacco chewers.  All four parameters were significantly elevated in oral PC patients compared with controls.  The levels of PBH and LSA showed significant increase in the oral PC patients compared with the normal tobacco chewers.  A significant increase was observed in the levels of TSA, LSA, mucoid proteins, and PBH in OC patients compared with controls, normal tobacco chewers, and patients with oral PC.  Increasing levels of all the biomarkers were found with progression of the malignant disease.  Elevations in the levels of TSA and LSA were statistically significant in Stage IV patients compared with Stage III patients.  The patients with metastases had higher levels of the biomarkers than the patients with primary OC.  However, elevations only in LSA levels were statistically significant.  These results suggest that evaluations of the serum glycoconjugate levels may be useful in diagnosis of the patients with oral PC or OC.  In addition to their value in early detection, they can also help in staging of the disease.
A prospective randomized comparison of protracted infusional 5-fluorouracil with or without weekly bolus cisplatin in metastatic colorectal carcinoma. A Mid-Atlantic Oncology Program study.  One hundred eighty-four patients with advanced measurable colorectal cancer not previously treated with chemotherapy were entered into a prospective randomized clinical trial by the Mid-Atlantic Oncology Program (MAOP) to assess the value of weekly cisplatin (20 mg/m2) when added to a protracted schedule of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) infusion (PIF) at 300 mg/m2/d for 10 weeks of every 12 weeks.  The liver was the primary indicator lesion in approximately 75% of the study group.  All tumor measurements required radiographic confirmation.  The response rate in the PIF alone arm was 35% (29 of 83; 95% confidence interval [CI], 25% to 46%) compared with 33% (28 of 85; 95% CI, 23% to 44%) for the arm in which weekly cisplatin was added to PIF.  The median survival times were 11.8 and 11.2 months in the two groups.  Weekly cisplatin does not appear to add to the effectiveness of PIF in colorectal carcinoma.
Prognostic value of histopathology in Ewing's sarcoma. Long-term follow-up of distal extremity primary tumors.  The pathologic material from 56 patients diagnosed initially as Ewing's sarcoma of the distal extremity and treated on National Cancer Institute protocols between 1968 and 1984 was reviewed and correlated with clinical outcome.  Histologically, the tumors were categorized, based on recent pathologic criteria, into three diagnostic groups: (1) typical Ewing's sarcoma, (2) atypical Ewing's sarcoma, and (3) other (predominantly peripheral neuroepithelioma [PN]).  Thirty-two patients (57%) had typical Ewing's, 13 (23%) were atypical, and 11 (20%) were in the "other" diagnostic category (seven [13%] PN, two primitive rhabdomyosarcoma, one primitive sarcoma of bone, and one synovial cell sarcoma).  No cases of metastatic neuroblastoma, osteosarcoma, or lymphoma were found.  Forty-five patients had localized disease at diagnosis; 11 had metastases.  Patients with typical Ewing's sarcoma were less likely to have metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis.  Only two of 32 patients with typical Ewing's sarcoma had metastases compared with nine of 24 patients in the two other groups.  The pattern of relapse was also different in these other groups compared with typical Ewing's patients; five patients developed lymph node metastases and two patients developed brain metastases.  Although the presence of metastatic disease at diagnosis was a strong negative prognostic factor, our histologic grouping was independently prognostic of clinical outcome in patients with localized disease.  Patients with typical osseous Ewing's sarcoma had an improved overall survival (P2 = 0.03) and patients with other tumors (neither typical nor atypical Ewing's sarcoma) had a poorer disease-free survival (P2 = 0.02).  Since no generally accepted histopathologic prognostic criteria exist for Ewing's sarcoma, the potential value of our proposed classification should be evaluated in a larger retrospective and a prospective study.
Prognostic factors in yolk sac tumors of the ovary. A clinicopathologic analysis of 29 cases.  Twenty-nine ovarian cancer patients with yolk sac tumors and germ cell tumors with yolk sac tissue as a component of their disease (16 endodermal sinus tumor, 11 mixed germ cell tumors, one embryonal carcinoma, and one polyembryoma) were treated with cytoreductive surgery and combination chemotherapy.  Prognostic factors were investigated in this group.  Patients with Stage I disease had a more favorable prognosis (P less than 0.003) than those with Stages II and IV disease.  The difference in prognosis was significant in cases where residual tumor was absent (P less than 0.003) and in cases where ascites was either absent or less than 100 ml in volume (P less than 0.05).  Endodermal sinus tumor with either an intestinal (P less than 0.05) or microcystic pattern (P less than 0.01) was more common in survivors than in those who died.  The age, preoperative serum alpha-fetoprotein level, maximum tumor size, and tumor weight had no significant correlation with prognosis.  In advanced cases, chemotherapy regimens including cisplatin gave better results than those containing vincristine, dactinomycin, and cyclophosphamide (P less than 0.05).  The optimal treatment of yolk sac tumors or tumors with yolk sac tissue as a component of the ovary is discussed in light of these results.
Bone sarcomas as second malignant neoplasms following childhood cancer.  This study explores the relationship between histologic variants of bone sarcomas and previous therapy in patients in whom an unrelated malignant neoplasm had been diagnosed during childhood.  Sarcomas of bone were the most common second malignant neoplasm (SMN) reported to the Late Effects Study Group, a 13-institution consortium consisting of pediatric oncology centers from western Europe, Canada, and the United States.  The authors attempted to relate the histologic subtypes of the 91 bone tumors to clinical factors such as previous therapy and genetic predisposition because morphologic variants have been shown to have biologic significance in other tumors and may have etiologic import.  The literature concerning the subtypes of bone tumors, clinical and experimental, is also reviewed.  The authors also investigated the effect of several factors on the time interval from the first diagnosis to the SMN (i.e., the bone sarcoma).  Anthracyclines significantly shortened the interval by about 3 years.  The primary diagnosis also significantly affected the interval, with leukemia/lymphomas having the shortest interval and retinoblastoma the longest.  The authors could not demonstrate any significant relationship between morphologic characteristics of the osteosarcoma and predisposing conditions.  However, lesions diagnosed as chondrosarcoma and malignant fibrous histiocytoma occurred almost exclusively in patients who had received radiation therapy to the site in which the SMN developed.
A Southwest Oncology Group study on the use of a human tumor cloning assay for predicting response in patients with ovarian cancer.  A total of 211 patients with epithelial ovarian cancer (168 with tumors refractory to prior chemotherapy and 43 with no prior chemotherapy) from 33 different Southwest Oncology Group institutions had their tumors sampled and specimens shipped to two central laboratories for drug-sensitivity testing in a human tumor cloning assay.  The 168 patients with a prior history of chemotherapy failure (median of four prior chemotherapeutic agents) were treated with the most effective agent(s) found in the cloning assay (23 patients), and those patients whose tumors did not form colonies in vitro or did not manifest any sensitivity to agent(s) were treated with a clinician's choice of agent(s) (101 patients).  The remaining 44 of the 168 patients were not treated with chemotherapy because of deteriorating performance status or early death.  The complete and partial response rate in patients treated according to assay results was 28% versus 11% for the patients treated according to clinician's choice (P = 0.03).  There was no statistically significant difference in survival between the two options (6.25 versus 7 months, respectively).  The 43 patients with no history of prior chemotherapy were all treated with standard combination chemotherapy, and their clinical response was compared with their in vitro sensitivity to the same agents.  Overall there was a 100% true-positive rate and 100% true-negative rate for the seven evaluable patients.  From these data the authors conclude that use of the human tumor cloning assay may increase the response rate but not the survival for selected patients with advanced chemotherapy-refractory ovarian cancer.  The study is weakened, however, by the many steps of patient selection necessitated by inadequate tumor colony formation in vitro and the inability to treat all patients (because of early death or a rapid decline in performance status).  The assay does appear to be worthy of additional study for predicting response to combination chemotherapy in patients without a prior history of chemotherapy.  Finally the use of central chemosensitivity testing laboratories is feasible for testing in vitro predictive assays in a cooperative group setting.
Achievement of life goals by adult survivors of modern treatment for childhood cancer.  To assess the impact of the diagnosis and modern treatment of childhood cancer on achievement of adult goals, the authors evaluated employment, health and life insurance coverage, marriage, divorce, and reproduction in 227 former pediatric cancer patients.  Each area was evaluated in relation to a common set of disease and demographic factors that included age at follow-up, age at diagnosis, gender, marital status, history of disease recurrence, and diagnosis.  Patients were younger than 20 years of age at diagnosis, and their diagnoses were made between January 1, 1960, and December 31, 1984.  The median age at diagnosis was 11.4 years, and the median age at follow-up was 26.6 years.  The percentage of unemployed male respondents did not differ from population norms.  The percentage of unemployed female respondents, however, was slightly higher than that of the United States population.  Approximately 11% of the survivors reported some form of employment-related discrimination, a level significantly lower than that of prior reports.  Company-offered health insurance was provided to 92.4% of full-time and 90.0% of part-time employed respondents.  Life insurance was purchased by 60% of full-time employed men and 55% of women.  These percentages were lower than those reported for the United States population.  Twenty-four percent of those with life insurance had difficulty obtaining it.  Fifty-eight percent of the subjects were married or lived as married.  The percentages of married men and women were significantly lower than United States norms.  Twenty percent of those who were married or lived as married have divorced or separated or no longer live as married.  Women aged 20 to 24 years were less likely to marry, and women aged 35 to 44 years had a significantly higher frequency of divorce than similarly aged United States women.  In general, the history of childhood cancer did not influence the decision to marry or live as married but was occasionally (20%) important in the decision to dissolve a marital relationship.  Many former patients indicated that their diagnosis and treatment for childhood cancer influenced their decision to have children.  The current study suggests that most former pediatric cancer patients achieve adult life goals.  Additional research is necessary to define those populations at greatest risk of failure to achieve these goals.
Prolonged response to carboplatin in an infant with brain stem glioma.  Adults and children with brain stem gliomas have a mean survival time of 15 months after radiation therapy (XRT).  Infants with this tumor present additional complexities for treatment because of possible neurotoxicity of the radiation to the developing brain.  We report a 15-month-old child with biopsy-proven brain stem glioma with clinical and radiographic evidence of disease progression.  She was treated with 24 monthly courses of carboplatin without radiation therapy and has had a 39+ month response.  The clinical response started after 3 months and the radiographic evidence was documented at 10 months by magnetic resonance imaging.  The toxicity was minimal.  Longitudinal neuropsychological assessment demonstrated continued improvement at 36 months post diagnosis but with some motor functioning below expected age levels.  Cervico-medullary astrocytoma in a young patient may be the appropriate clinical setting for future trials of chemotherapy without XRT.
Postoperative follow-up of patients with early breast cancer. Patterns of care among clinical oncologists and a review of the literature.  Eighty clinical oncologists in the southeastern United States were surveyed to determine their strategies for follow-up care after primary treatment of early-stage breast cancer.  The frequency of use of the history and physical examination, complete blood count, liver function tests, carcinoembryonic antigen levels, chest x-ray, skeletal survey, bone scan, liver scan, and mammogram for observing hypothetical low- and high-risk patients was assessed.  Yearly mammograms were recommended by more than 95% of respondents.  History and physical examination were the modalities used most often, whereas periodic bone and liver scans were used only in a minority of patients.  A review of the literature supported the strategy of the respondents in this survey and further underscored the cost-effectiveness of the history and physical examination in detecting recurrence during follow-up.  Based on this survey and supporting literature, recommendations for reasonable yet cost-conscious follow-up are presented.
Imaging of a parapharyngeal hemangiopericytoma. Radioimmunoscintigraphy (SPECT) with indium-111-labeled anti-CEA antibody, and comparison to digital subtraction angiography, computed tomography, and immunohistochemistry.  A 27-year-old male patient with a parapharyngeal hemangiopericytoma was investigated radiologically with orthopantomography, computed tomography, and digital subtraction angiography before the operation.  Because a malignancy was suspected, the patient was imaged with gamma camera using radiolabeled monoclonal anticarcinoembryonal antigen antibody including single photon emission computed tomography.  The radioantibody accumulated strongly into the neoplasm.  Tumor to background ratio was 2.2.  Samples of the excised tumor were stained immunohistochemically for desmin, vimentin, muscle actin, cytokeratin, CEA (carcinoembryonic antigen), and factor VIII.  They showed that the antibody uptake was of unspecific nature and not due to CEA expression in the tumor.
Results of treating ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast with conservative surgery and radiation therapy.  To determine the frequency, pattern, and time course of tumor recurrence in the breast, the outcome of 38 women with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) treated with conservative surgery and radiation therapy between 1976 and 1985 was studied.  Surgery typically consisted of local excision without evaluation of the microscopic margins of resection.  The median radiation dose to the tumor site was 6400 cGy.  With a median follow-up time of 81 months, eight patients (21%) have experienced a recurrence in the breast.  The time course to recurrence was protracted in some cases, with failures occurring at 17, 27, 43, 63, 71, 83, 92, and 104 months.  The 5-year and 8-year actuarial rates of tumor recurrence in the breast were 8% and 27%, respectively.  Seven patients had a recurrence at or near the primary tumor site, four with invasive carcinoma, and one had an invasive recurrence at a site elsewhere in the breast.  No clinical or pathologic factor was significantly associated with an increased risk of recurrence, but the number of patients in the study population was small.  The authors reached the following conclusions for patients with DCIS treated with conservative surgery and radiation therapy without careful mammographic and pathologic evaluation: (1) recurrence in the breast may be seen in at least one fifth of the patients; (2) recurrence typically occurs at or near the primary site; and (3) recurrence can occur long after treatment.  Careful mammographic and pathologic assessment may be useful in reducing the local recurrence rate and should be considered essential if patients are considered for conservative surgery and radiation therapy.
The interferon system in carcinoma of the cervix. Effect of radiation and chemotherapy.  Thirteen patients with advanced carcinoma of the cervix were studied for parameters of the interferon system compared with 40 age-matched and sex-matched controls.  All patients had measurable serum interferon levels; controls did not.  All patients had non-antibody-type interferon-inhibitory activity, and controls had none.  Interferon-synthesizing potential was higher in controls than in patients.  After successful radiation and chemotherapy, these parameters normalized in the patients.  No change was seen in one patient who did not respond to therapy.
Immunohistologic detection of the epidermal growth factor receptor in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.  Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R) expression was studied immunohistologically in 38 patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.  The EGF-R was faintly expressed in basal and parabasal layers of normal esophageal epithelia and in cancer nests of 20 patients; it was strongly expressed in all areas of dysplastic epithelia and in cancer nests of 18 patients.  The patients with strongly expressed EGF-R had lymph node metastases more frequently, and their prognosis was poorer than those with faintly expressed EGF-R.  The EGF-R expression showed a mosaic pattern in 17 patients and a diffuse pattern in 21 patients.  The patients with a mosaic pattern had lymph node metastases more frequently and a worse prognosis than those with a diffuse pattern.  Expression of EGF-R in metastatic lymph nodes was similar to that in strongly expressing areas of primary cancers with a mosaic pattern.  Thus EGF-R expression may be an important indicator for malignancies of esophageal squamous cell carcinomas because primary cancer cells with strongly expressed EGF-R metastasize to lymph nodes more frequently.
The value of immunohistochemistry for collagen IV expression in colorectal carcinomas.  The Dukes' classification has well-established prognostic value in colorectal cancer patients.  Yet, in each Dukes' class, the survival of individual patients may vary considerably.  Recent studies show prognostic significance of genetic alterations in colorectal carcinoma.  However, the importance of tumor stromal components noted in the surrounding tissue may have been overlooked by the methods used.  Therefore, in a longitudinal study of 154 patients with colorectal cancer operated on between 1967 and 1974, the authors determined the influence on prognosis of lymphocytic infiltration and expression of collagen type IV in tumor stroma.  Also, age, sex, Dukes' classification, grade of tumor differentiation, vasoinvasion, and the number of positive lymph nodes were analyzed.  Follow-up was at least 15 years.  Lymphocytic infiltration and collagen IV expression were scored as mild, moderate, or severe.  Survival was analyzed by a Cox proportional-hazards model.  The density of lymphocytic invasion showed no significant influence on survival.  Collagen IV expression analyzed as a single variable was significantly (P = 0.038) related to better prognosis in colorectal cancer patients.  By multi-variate analysis collagen IV expression showed a trend toward better prognosis that was not statistically significant (P = 0.12).  Dukes' classification (P less than 0.001), the presence of vasoinvasion (P = 0.009), and lymph node status (P = 0.04) significantly influenced survival.  In conclusion immunohistochemistry for collagen IV is an important additional staining technique with prognostic value.  In addition, collagen IV immunostaining facilitates recognition of vascular invasion by highlighting the basement membrane of vessels.
A phase II trial of carboplatin and vinblastine in the treatment of advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus.  Cisplatin-containing regimens are active in the treatment of esophageal cancer, with response rates of 25% to 35% in advanced disease.  Carboplatin is less toxic than cisplatin; as a single agent, several responses were seen against esophageal tumors.  To better define the role of carboplatin in esophageal cancer, the authors treated 19 chemotherapy-naive patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus with carboplatin and vinblastine.  Carboplatin (450 mg/m2 intravenously [IV] on days 1, 29, 57, and every 6 weeks thereafter) was given with vinblastine (5 mg/m2 IV on day 1 and then every 2 weeks).  No major responses were seen.  No significant renal toxicity and only mild gastrointestinal toxicity (emesis, diarrhea) were observed.  Hematologic toxicity was more severe in patients with prior radiation therapy (RT), with three of six patients with prior RT exhibiting Grade 4 hematologic toxicity.  Although generally less toxic than cisplatin-containing regimens, carboplatin and vinblastine is also less active in the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus.  Hematologic toxicity with this regimen was severe in patients who had received prior RT.
A phase II multi-institutional trial of low-dose N-(phosphonacetyl)-L-aspartate and high-dose 5-fluorouracil as a short-term infusion in the treatment of adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. A Southwest Oncology Group study.  Adenocarcinoma of the pancreas is a highly lethal malignancy and chemotherapy has had little impact on the natural history of this disease.  PALA, used to potentiate 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), has been shown to have synergy in vivo and in vitro.  Twenty-seven patients were treated with an intravenous push dose of PALA (250 mg/m2) followed 24 hours later with a 24-hour infusion of 5-FU (2600 mg/m2).  This regimen was repeated weekly.  There was one partial response of 21 eligible patients with an estimated response rate of 5%.  Toxicity was severe with one toxic death and four patients experiencing Grade 4 toxicity.  5-Fluorouracil and PALA, given in the schedule described, do not appear to be effective against adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.
A dose-intensive regimen of 5-fluorouracil for the treatment of metastatic colorectal carcinoma.  5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) was delivered in a dose-intensive schedule to 23 patients with metastatic or unresectable colorectal carcinoma.  The schedule consisted of bolus single-dose 5-FU therapy 400 to 500 mg followed by 4-day infusion of 5-FU, 600 to 800 mg/m2/day, followed by a 17-day to 24-day infusion of 200 to 250 mg/m2/day.  Partial remissions were seen in 22% of all eligible patients.  Significant toxicity, including mucositis, diarrhea, and hand-foot syndrome, necessitated dose reductions in most patients.  The authors conclude that 5-FU given in this moderately intensive schedule is associated with a moderate level of response, as easily achieved with more conventional schedules or with 5-FU-leucovorin combinations.  Tumor responsiveness to dose intensive 5-FU regimens may be limited.
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radical surgery in locally advanced cervical cancer. Prognostic factors for response and survival.  Between January 1986 and September 1988, 75 patients with locally advanced cervical carcinoma (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics [FIGO] Stages IB-III) received three courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC), including cisplatin, bleomycin, and methotrexate (PBM).  Fifteen percent of patients achieved a complete response (CR) and 68% a partial response (PR).  Pretreatment characteristics were analyzed for response to NAC.  Significantly lower response rates were found in patients with tumor size more than 5 cm in diameter and bilateral parametrial involvement to the pelvic side wall.  None of the biological parameters studied was related to chemoresponsiveness.  Patients achieving CR or PR had a significantly improved 3-year survival rate compared with those who did not respond.  After NAC, radical surgery was possible in all responding patients.  The median number of lymph nodes removed was 60.  A lower than expected incidence of lymph node metastases was detected.  None of the clinical and pathologic features considered was significantly correlated with the lymph node status.  Twelve of the 62 operated patients had disease recurrence.  Pathologic parametrial involvement and cervical infiltration equal to or deeper than 5 mm were found to be significant prognostic factors for recurrence.  A 3-year, disease-free survival of 89%, 73%, and 43% for Stage IB-IIA, IIB, and III, respectively, was found.  Among the operated patients these rates increased to 100%, 81%, and 66% for Stage IB-IIA, IIB, and III, respectively.  A prospective randomized trial comparing NAC and surgery with radiotherapy alone is in progress.
Prognostic factors in the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma with transcatheter arterial embolization and arterial infusion.  From January 1986 to December 1988, a prospective trial of transcatheter arterial treatment was carried out for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).  Two hundred seventy-five patients were included.  Okuda's staging system was employed.  Patients with Stage I and II HCC were treated by transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) with a gelatin sponge containing an anti-cancer agent (protocol 1a); a gelatin sponge and iodized oil mixed with an anti-cancer agent (protocol 1b); or iodized oil mixed with an anti-cancer agent (protocol 2).  Patients with Stage III HCC were treated with iodized oil with anti-cancer agent (protocol 2).  As an exception, patients with an unsuccessful superselective catheterization into the proper hepatic artery by Seldinger technique or obstruction of the main trunk of the portal vein were treated with percutaneous transcatheter arterial infusion into the common hepatic artery regardless of stage (protocol 3).  Tumor type and extension, area of tumor involvement, portal vein involvement, method of treatment, and presence of ascites and icterus were found to be the significant factors for an initial response to therapy.  Treatment method was the most important factor.  Respective survival rates at 1 and 2 years were 70.9% and 55.3% for protocol 1a; 62.3% and 43.8% for protocol 1b; 37.8% and 18.3% for protocol 2; and 16.5% and 0% for protocol 3.  Many factors proved to significantly influenced prognosis; however, tumor type had the most important prognostic significance followed by AFP value, ascites, treatment protocol, and area of tumor involvement.
Second cancer after radiation therapy for cancer of the uterine cervix.  Radiation-induced cancers after radiation therapy for cancer of the uterine cervix were investigated on 11,855 patients including 5725 patients treated with radiation therapy alone, 1969 postoperative radiation therapy and 4161 surgery alone.  The observed-to-expected ratios of the second primary cancer was 0.933 for the patients with radiation therapy alone and 1.074 for the patients with postoperative radiation therapy, respectively.  No significant increase was observed in the risk of second primary cancers when all sites were combined.  However, assessing on site by site basis, significant excess was noted for the rectum cancer, leukemia, and bladder cancer for the radiation therapy group but not for the surgery group.  A significant excess of lung cancer was observed in both radiation therapy and surgery groups, which was attributed to some other causative factors.  Radiation-induced cancers were suggested to develop apparently in organs involved in the irradiated field.
Evaluation of a simple line width test involving magnetic resonance spectroscopy of plasma in carcinoma of the ovary.  Magnetic resonance spectroscopic (MRS) measurement of human plasma has been reported as a generally applicable marker for malignancy: patients with malignancy had a MRS line width significantly different from patients with benign diseases or healthy controls.  The authors investigated the value of this test in 213 women with ovarian carcinoma, benign pelvic masses, benign nongynecologic diseases, and healthy controls.  The MRS measurements were performed on plasma samples at 21 degrees C or 27 degrees C.  The line width parameters were obtained by averaging the width at half the height of the methyl and methylene peaks on the resonance spectra.  At 27 degrees C using 33 Hz as the threshold for an abnormal result, there was a significant correlation between the result of the test and the presence or absence of malignancy.  However, the study demonstrates that the specificity (0.44) and positive predictive value (0.42) are too low for the test to be useful in the management of patients with carcinoma of the ovary.  At 21 degrees C no correlation between the results of the test and the clinical status of women with carcinoma of the ovary were observed.  In 47 patients the test did not predict preoperatively the benign or malignant nature of a pelvic mass.
Ki-67 immunostaining in human breast tumors and its relationship to prognosis.  Ki-67 labeling was quantified in 37 nonmalignant breast tissues and in 63 breast carcinomas by counting ten random high-power fields each in three section planes (RC) or by evaluation of the area with the highest labeling density (HDC).  Both procedures proved to be highly correlated (rs = 0.94).  Ki-67-positive fractions of the nonmalignant tissues (mean, 2.1% for RC and 4.1% for HDC) were significantly lower as compared with the carcinomas (mean, 14.5% for RC and 17.5% for HDC).  In carcinomas the Ki-67 labeling was significantly associated with pT stage, axillary lymph node status, and tumor grading and inversely related to progesterone receptor status.  Using the medians of both counting methods (12% for RC and 17% for HDC) as cutoff points, significantly different curves for overall and disease-free survival (median follow-up, 37 months) were obtained.  However, Cox multivariate analysis failed to demonstrate an independent effect of Ki-67 labeling.  In contrast, Ki-67 reactivity seems to be of independent prognostic value if a higher cutoff level was selected.
A high prevalence of antibody to the hepatitis C virus in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma in Japan.  In Japan, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most prevalent cancers, with a reported fatality rate showing a consistent and significant increase in the last decade.  At most, only 25% of HCC cases are positive for the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg).  To investigate a potential role for hepatitis C virus (HCV) in the development of HCC, sera from 105 HBsAg-negative HCC patients were collected from five districts of Japan and assayed for antibody to HCV antigen (HCVAb).  A large number of these patients (76.2%) were found to be positive for the HCVAb in comparison with the reported prevalence in sera from blood donors (1.1%).  A history of blood transfusion was found in 39.6% of the cases positive for HCVAb, which was significantly different to the lower rate (4.7%) observed in HCC patients who were both positive for HBsAg and negative for HCVAb (P less than 0.001).
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the brain after Hodgkin's disease. An immunohistochemical study.  Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) of the central nervous system (CNS) is a rarely reported complication of Hodgkin's disease (HD).  Two patients with NHL of the brain after HD were studied by histologic and immunohistochemical methods.  Both patients were in the second decade, had been treated with radiation and chemotherapy, had experienced a relapse of HD before development of NHL, had no evidence of HD at the time of diagnosis of NHL, and died within 1 year of diagnosis.  Both brain neoplasms were large cell immunoblastic lymphomas of B-cell lineage.  Patients with HD appear to be at increased risk for NHL of the CNS, which may have a poor prognosis.
DNA and RNA flow cytometric study in multiple myeloma. Clinical correlations.  Flow cytometric studies of cellular DNA and RNA content using the acridine-orange technique were conducted in 81 patients with multiple myeloma (MM).  All patients were treated with the M-2 protocol and clinical response was evaluated according to the criteria of the Chronic Leukemia-Myeloma Task Force.  Aneuploid DNA stemlines were found in 38.2% of untreated patients with a median DNA index (DNA-I) of 1.15 in marrow aspirates and 1.22 in biopsy specimens.  The median percentage of cells with abnormal DNA content was 31.5 (aspirates) and 35 (biopsy specimens) and a positive correlation with the percentage of bone marrow plasma cells was observed.  Significantly higher proliferation (S-phase) was found in marrow biopsy specimens as compared with marrow aspirates.  Significantly higher RNA content (RNA index [RNA-I]) was observed in aneuploid versus diploid patients in biopsy material.  There was no difference in response to the Memorial Hospital M-2 protocol between diploid and aneuploid patients.  In patients with DNA-I greater than 1.15 remission duration was shorter as compared with DNA-I less than or equal to 1.15.  Furthermore, no difference in cellular RNA content was noted between responders and nonresponders.  This study demonstrates no correlation between cellular RNA content and response, as previously described for patients treated with vincristine, Adriamycin, and dexamethasone (VAD), but DNA aneuploidy appears to be an adverse prognostic factor in MM patients treated with the M-2 protocol.  It also demonstrates that prognostic models for MM are not universal but depend on the chemotherapeutic regimen used.
An immunohistochemical evaluation of progesterone receptor in frozen sections, paraffin sections, and cytologic imprints of breast carcinomas.  Two monoclonal antibodies to progesterone receptor (PR), JZB39 and KD68, were used for the immunocytochemical visualization of PR in different kinds of breast cancer specimens including (1) cryostat sections of tumors frozen at -80 degrees C; (2) paraffin sections of tumors fixed in formalin or in Bouin's fixative for varying periods of time at room temperature or at 4 degrees C; and (3) imprints and cryostat sections prepared from the tissue used for frozen section diagnosis and stored at -80 degrees C after fixation in Zamboni's solution.  Sections of conventionally frozen specimens as well as imprints and cryostat sections stored for varying periods of time were stained with the peroxidase-antiperoxidase technique, whereas the avidin-biotin technique was used for paraffin sections.  In all types of specimens the PR immunostaining was localized to the nuclei of carcinoma cells and displayed considerable heterogeneity both in intensity and in distribution of positive cells.  Close correspondence was found between the different immunohistochemical techniques as well as between immunostaining and steroid-binding assays.  PR staining was more frequently positive in well-differentiated than in moderately or poorly differentiated carcinomas, whereas no meaningful correlation was found between PR staining and extent of the disease.  Similar results were obtained with the immunostaining of estrogen receptor in the same material using monoclonal antibodies H222 and D75P3 gamma.  Thus, by choosing the technique that best suits the type of specimen available, it is possible to obtain valid information on the receptor status of any breast carcinoma, regardless of its size and clinical presentation.
A comparative study of histopathology, hormone receptors, peanut lectin binding, Ki-67 immunostaining, and nucleolar organizer region-associated proteins in human breast cancer.  The current study was performed on 71 cases of human female breast cancer and compares the results of five morphologic methods developed for the detection of estrogen receptors (ER), progesterone receptors (PgR), lectin Peanut agglutinin (PNA) binding sites, monoclonal antibody Ki-67 immunoreactivity, and the mean number of argyrophilic nucleolar organizer regions (Ag-NOR).  All the parameters were evaluated on serial cryostat sections representative of a closely related, if not identical, neoplastic population.  A significant positive correlation was found between the occurrence of estrogen, progesterone, and peanut receptors and between Ki-67 immunoreactivity, mean number of NOR, and mitotic index.  Furthermore, ER, PgR, and PNA receptors showed a significant, inverse correlation with Ki-67 immunoreactivity, mitotic index, and mean number of Ag-NOR.  These results provide further data that support the hypothesis that (1) progesterone and PNA receptors are estrogen-induced and indicate a metabolic response of the target cells to functioning estrogen receptors; (2) the mean number of NOR reflects the cell kinetics of the tumor; and (3) metabolic differentiation of neoplastic cells is inversely correlated to the proliferation index.
Nucleolar organizer regions in precancerous and cancerous lesions of the bronchus.  Using a silver staining technique, nucleolar organizer region-associated proteins (Ag-NOR) were studied in paraffin sections of five specimens of normal bronchial epithelium, eight of atypical squamous metaplasia, five of carcinoma in situ, and seven of microinvasive squamous cell carcinoma.  The mean number of Ag-NOR in the nucleus were normal epithelium 1.2 +/- 0.1 (mean +/- SD), atypical squamous metaplasia (borderline lesion) 2.2 +/- 0.5, carcinoma in situ 3.8 +/- 0.6, and microinvasive squamous cell carcinoma 4.8 +/- 1.1.  There was a highly significant difference between the Ag-NOR numbers in the atypical squamous metaplasia and those in the carcinoma in situ (P less than 0.01).  The Ag-NOR staining is a useful technique for the differential diagnosis of difficult borderline lesions in the bronchial epithelium.
Insulin secretion and action in patients with pancreatic cancer.  The authors investigated insulin secretory capacity and insulin action in 11 preoperative patients with pancreatic carcinoma and 15 age-matched and weight-matched healthy subjects (C).  Five patients were classified as diabetic (D), two as impaired glucose tolerant (IGT), and four as nondiabetic (ND).  Postabsorptive serum insulin levels (mean +/- SE, in uU/ml) in D (12 +/- 2), IGT (17 +/- 7), and ND (10 +/- 2) were comparable.  After administration of 100 g of oral glucose, peak insulin achieved in D (60 +/- 11) was lower than in IGT (101 +/- 26) and ND (83 +/- 20), whereas peak insulin levels in IGT and ND were significantly (P less than 0.05) higher than in C (45 +/- 6).  Comparable insulin response to nonglucose stimuli was documented in all subjects using the slow arginine infusion test with mean serum insulin of 27 +/- 4 in D, 28 +/- 6 in IGT, 34 +/- 10 in ND, and 32 +/- 5 in C.  In six patients (P) and six controls, insulin action was assessed by the euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp technique, with glucose turnover rates estimated by [3-3H]glucose infusion.  Steady-state plasma glucose concentrations were maintained at 92 +/- 3 (P) and 91 +/- 1 mg/dl (C).  After insulin infusion at the rate of 1.0 mU/kg/min, comparable high physiologic insulin levels were observed in P (73 to 104 uU/ml) and in C (81 to 103 uU/ml).  Postabsorptive rates of endogenous glucose appearance (Ra) were higher in P (2.86 to 3.02 mg/kg/min) than in C (1.50 to 2.80 mg/kg/min).  At high physiologic insulin concentrations, negative Ra values were documented in all subjects, and complete suppression of Ra was assumed.  Total body glucose use (M) was consistently lower in P (3.90 to 6.40 mg/kg/min) than in C (6.98 to 10.40 mg/kg/min), consistent with a state of insulin resistance.  Patients with pancreatic cancer manifest insulin resistance by virtue of a decrease in total body glucose use (M) and decreased insulin response to glucose due to either inherent beta cell dysfunction or decreased islet cell mass.  The latter is not identifiable by histologic morphology.
Pancreatic mucinous cystadenocarcinoma with pseudosarcomatous mural nodules. A report of a case with immunohistochemical study.  A case of pancreatic mucinous cystadenocarcinoma (PMC) with two pseudosarcomatous mural nodules (PMN) is described.  These nodules have not been previously described in this type of tumor.  In ovarian mucinous tumors (OMT), similar nodules have been reported, the nature of which has been discussed in detail.  Here the similarity between the tumor described here and ovarian tumors is stressed.  The immunohistochemical study carried out disclosed in the nodules strong positive staining for vimentin and moderate positivity for keratin and epithelial membrane antigen.  These findings, along with histologic details, favor the epithelial nature of the nodules.  It was concluded that the nodules are foci of anaplastic carcinoma with high proliferative cell rate, which could explain the coexpression of vimentin and keratin.
Prognostic implications of tumor diameter in carcinoma of the head of the pancreas.  Two hundred twenty patients with a carcinoma in the head of the pancreas were divided into three tumor diameter groups: group 1, 0.5 to 4.4 cm (n = 72); group 2, 4.5 to 6.0 cm (n = 77); and group 3, 6.1 to 15.0 cm (n = 71).  For these tumor diameter groups a six-fold eliminatory curability analysis was performed.  Of the patients with liver metastases in group 1 the last patient had died at 10 months and in groups 2 and 3 no patients were alive at 18 months after the start of complaints.  Patients with extrahepatic metastases did not survive 12 months in group 1, 16 months in group 2, and 25 months in group 3.  The 6% actuarial survival rate for inoperable patients was reached in group 1 after 17 months, in group 2 after 36 months, and in group 3 after 27 months after the start of complaints.  For groups 1 through 3 in curable, but not curatively operated patients, the respective 0% actuarial survival rate was reached at 24 months, 23 months, and 14 months.  The 0% actuarial survival rate in patients with irresectable vessel invasion was reached in group 1 at 33 months, in group 2 at 23 months, and in group 3 at 25 months.  The 0% actuarial survival rate in patients with an irresectable tumor was reached at 33 months, 31 months, and 27 months after the start of complaints in groups 1, 2, and 3, respectively.  The 0% actuarial survival rate in curatively operated patients was reached in group 3 after 26 months and in group 2 after 29 months.  In group 1 25% of the patients were alive at 36 months after the start of complaints.  Small tumors were associated with the greatest chance of curative operation and on average had the longest survival.  However, small tumors with liver or other metastases carried a worse prognosis than large tumors with liver or other metastases.  If tumors were found not to be resectable at the time of operation, the size of the tumor did not appear to affect survival.
Response rates in relapsed Wilms' tumor. A need for new effective agents.  Three hundred eighty-one children with Wilms' tumor were treated in the United Kingdom Children's Cancer Study Group WT1 Study (1982 to 1986).  Seventy-one patients had relapses during or after treatment with surgery and chemotherapy, and radiation therapy, depending on stage and histologic characteristics.  Forty-nine patients were evaluable for disease response to second-line chemotherapy alone.  Evaluation of response to chemotherapy was impossible in the remaining patients because either surgery or radiation therapy was used at the time of relapse.  With second-line combination chemotherapy (which included ifosfamide, etoposide/VM26, cisplatin/carboplatin, bleomycin, melphalan, and Thiotepa [Lederle Laboratories, Pearl River, NY]), there were five complete responses and 12 partial responses.  In patients with favorable histologic findings, six of nine with Stage I, five of ten with Stage II, none of 11 with Stage III, three of 16 with Stage IV, and one of five with Stage V disease survived.  Two survivors were treated with chemotherapy alone; the others received combined treatment with chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and/or surgery.  For those with unfavorable histologic findings of any stage, only two of 20 survived.  The authors conclude that, even for patients with localized disease with favorable histologic findings, the "salvage" rate is little more than 50%, and for all other stages and histologic findings the likelihood of cure after relapse is remote.  There is clearly a need for additional effective chemotherapeutic agents for these patients.
Primary treatment of large and massive adult sarcomas with iododeoxyuridine and aggressive hyperfractionated irradiation.  For a decade, the authors have experimented with treatment for unresectable adult soft tissue and bony sarcomas.  Over the last 6 years, they have combined hyperfractionated radiation therapy and intravenous iododeoxyuridine as a radiosensitizer, in regimens designed to minimize toxicity and permit delivery of aggressive radiation therapy.  Patients with solitary lesions and those with metastasis (38%) were treated in the hope of both potential cure in some and durable palliation in others.  The most formidable of these cancers have been those that are large or massive, often requiring five or more fields and extensive treatment planning.  The authors report results from 36 patients with large unresectable sarcomas (tumors ranging from 5 to 35 cm; average 14 cm) treated with hyperfractionated radiation therapy, with a minimum follow-up of 1 year, follow-up of 4 or more years (in 50%), or follow-up until death.  Overall local control has been 60%, with control of 66% of lesions from 5 to 9 cm, 63% of those from 10 to 14 cm, 63% of those from 15 to 19 cm, and 57% of those greater than 20 to 40 cm.  Morbidity has been modest.  This experience compares favorably with the authors' earlier trials with misonidazole, and toxicity has been reduced considerably.
Ultrasound and ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy of supraclavicular lymph nodes in patients with esophageal carcinoma.  The use of ultrasound combined with ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy (UGFAB) of supraclavicular lymph nodes in the pretreatment staging of 37 patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus is described.  All patients underwent computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest and the abdomen and ultrasound of the abdomen and supraclavicular regions.  Supraclavicular lymph node metastases (Stage IV disease according to the tumor nodes metastasis [TNM] classification) were cytologically diagnosed in seven (18.9%) of the 37 patients.  In two of these patients, no other metastases were found.  In the other five patients, UGFAB replaced more invasive diagnostic procedures.  Due to their superficial location, ultrasound and UGFAB of the supraclavicular lymph nodes was relatively simple to perform, and contributed to an improved staging of squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus.
Altered protein tyrosine kinase levels in human colon carcinoma.  To further understand the molecular mechanisms and the biological indicators of colonic tumorigenesis, the authors examined tyrosine kinase activity in the cytosol and in the particulate fraction of the homogenates of specimens from 20 human colonic carcinomas and compared them with the adjacent normal mucosal tissues.  Total protein tyrosine kinase activity could be precisely detected using miniphosphocellulose column purification and a synthetic peptide, Glu-asparagine (Asp)-alanine (Ala)-Glu-tyrosine (Tyr)-Ala-Ala-arginine (Arg)-Arg-Arg-glycine (Gly) (E11-G1), as an artificial substrate.  Tyrosine kinase activity of colonic carcinoma and normal mucosa was reduced in the cytosol fraction whereas activity in the particulate fraction was elevated with respect to protein concentration.  The average specific activity ratios were 1.95 +/- 0.27 (normal cytosolic/carcinoma cytosolic) and 0.57 +/- 0.01 (normal particulate/carcinoma particulate) for tyrosine kinase activity.  Cellular distribution (% cytosol) of tyrosine kinase activity in normal mucosa and in carcinoma varied from 21.0% to 91.2% and from 7.0% to 61.4%, respectively.  In nearly all cases the percentage of cytosolic tyrosine kinase activity in carcinoma tissues was lower than in normal tissues.  There was no difference due to histologic type or the presence of adenomatous components.  A significant decrease of cytosolic tyrosine kinases was correlated with Dukes' Stage A.  With advancing Dukes' stage, the average specific activity ratios (normal cytosol/carcinoma cytosol) were decreased.  This study indicates that colonic carcinogenesis might be associated with alterations in cellular levels of tyrosine kinase activity and that the average specific activity ratio (normal cytosol/carcinoma cytosol) had a possible correlation with colonic tumor growth.
Watch and wait after careful surgical treatment and staging in well-differentiated early ovarian cancer.  Patients with well-differentiated epithelial ovarian cancer Stages Ia, Ib, Ic, and IIa (FIGO 1976) were observed after surgical treatment without adjuvant therapy.  Careful surgical staging was required, and the extent of the staging procedure was assessed in each individual patient.  There were 107 patients entered in the study by nine Dutch oncology centers.  Of these 107, 21 did not fulfill all of the inlet criteria of the study and were excluded.  Central pathologic review was performed in the remaining 86 cases, revealing that there was borderline tumor in seven patients, moderately or poorly differentiated tumor in nine patients, and tumor of nonepithelial histologic cell type in one patient.  In two cases, no material for histologic review was available.  After exclusion of these 19 cases, 67 patients were further analyzed.  None of these 67 patients was lost during the follow-up period that ranged from 19 to 99 months (mean, 50 months).  Tumor recurrence was found in four patients after 11, 25, 34, and 34 months of follow-up, all of whom died shortly after diagnosis of the recurrence without satisfactory response to secondary treatment.  For the patients who underwent the most extensive staging procedure, disease-free 5-year survival was 100%.  For the patients who were inaccurately staged, disease-free 5-year survival was 88%.  It was concluded that well-differentiated early stage (Ia-IIa) ovarian cancer carries an excellent prognosis after surgical treatment and complete surgical staging, with the possible exception of patients with Stage Ic disease with malignant peritoneal washings.  Furthermore, it was considered that the application of more objective and consistent ways of assessing tumor grade should be encouraged.  Surgical staging should be regarded as the golden standard in defining subsets of low-risk patients and should be included and clearly defined in future trials on early ovarian cancer.
Loss of expression of blood group antigen H is associated with cellular invasion and spread of oral squamous cell carcinomas.  Membrane-bound carbohydrates may influence the metastatic behavior of cancer cells.  Forty-two squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) of the buccal and maxillary alveolar mucosa were studied retrospectively using a monoclonal antibody (BE2) that reacts with blood group H (type 2 chain) structure.  H-antigen staining within the entire tumor did not correlate with the stage of the tumor, i.e., spread of the tumors.  However, loss of staining within the most invasive sites of the tumors correlated significantly with the stage of tumor development and histologic grade of malignancy.  These findings support the view that features relating to the cells of deeper parts of the carcinomas are very important for the clinical behavior of the tumors, and that loss of H-antigen expression is related to the stage of tumor and invasion of carcinoma cells.
Ras gene mutations in intraductal papillary neoplasms of the pancreas. Analysis in five cases.  Five intraductal papillary neoplasms of the pancreas were analyzed for the presence of the Ras gene mutations.  Three (60%) of the five neoplasms showed point mutations at K-ras codon 12.  This incidence of the mutations was rather low compared with that found with ordinary pancreatic adenocarcinoma.  The presence of the mutations did not correlate with the severity of cellular atypia, but was apparently related to the size of the tumor.  The two neoplasms that had no mutations were smaller than the others that had mutations.  The analysis suggested that Ras gene mutation is not the first genetic alteration of tumor progression, but that it occurs during the development of neoplasms of the pancreas.
Osteosarcoma in young children.  The clinicopathologic features of osteosarcoma in 12 children younger than 16 years of age treated at The Children's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, during a 70-year time period are presented.  Only one of six children treated before 1972 is a long-term survivor.  Four of six children (67%) treated after 1972 are disease-free with an average follow-up of 8.8 years.  The year 1972 marked the onset of use of effective chemotherapy in osteosarcoma, namely, high-dose methotrexate and leucovorin rescue.  It would appear that the pathologic features and behavior of osteosarcoma in young children is similar to that of osteosarcoma in older children and adolescents.  A combination of complete (wide) surgical resection or amputation and aggressive chemotherapy offers the best chance of long-term survival.
Fine-needle aspiration in hepatocellular carcinoma. Combined cytologic and histologic approach.  Cytologic features of fine-needle aspiration (FNA) of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) have not been well documented.  Most previous reports described only the the morphologic features of the tumor cells without considering the sinusoidal stroma.  Cytohistologic correlation on tissue from the same aspirate has rarely been done.  This report describes the cytologic patterns of 50 cases of HCC in terms of histologic pattern observed in cell blocks prepared from the same aspiration specimen and classified according to the World Health Organization (WHO) classification.  Tumors were classified according to the predominant pattern.  Thirty-two cases gave the trabecular pattern.  Smears could be subdivided into a central-sinusoidal pattern (23 cases) and a peripheral-sinusoidal pattern (nine cases).  One case gave the pseudoglandular pattern.  Seventeen cases gave the compact pattern with inconspicuous sinusoids.  In all cases sinusoids were easily recognized in cell block sections.  Other cytologic features such as intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions, eosinophilic globules, and bile secretion could be seen in both smears and cell blocks.  Mallory's hyalin and ground glass inclusions were only recognized in cell blocks.  More attention should be paid to the sinusoidal stroma for diagnosis of HCC in FNA; cell blocks should be more widely utilized to this effect; cytologic patterns could be classified according to the WHO histologic classification.
Clinical presentation, treatment, and outcome of trilateral retinoblastoma.  In this report, three new cases of trilateral retinoblastoma are presented.  The clinical presentation, treatment, and outcome of the patients are described and compared with those of 32 cases that have been previously reported in the literature.  A positive family history was obtained in 68% of the patients.  The mean age at diagnosis of bilateral retinoblastoma was 7.2 months.  The mean age at diagnosis of trilateral disease was 39.7 months, resulting in a mean latent interval of 32.6 months.  The mean time from diagnosis of trilateral retinoblastoma to death was 6.6 months, and all patients died with spinal metastases.  The patients who received no therapy survived an average of 1.3 months after the diagnosis of trilateral disease.  The patients who received any form of definitive therapy survived 9.7 months.  Five patients who had complete or dramatic response to therapy by computed tomography scans had local intracranial tumor present at autopsy.  Therefore, more aggressive local therapy may be warranted.
Factors related to and consequences of weight loss in patients with stomach cancer. The Norwegian Multicenter experience. Norwegian Stomach Cancer Trial.  Of 1165 patients with stomach cancer included in a national, prospective multicenter study with 51 surgical units participating, information about weight loss before diagnosis was available for 855 patients (73%).  Median weight loss was 5 kg; 259 patients (31%) experienced no weight loss.  By logistic regression analysis the authors found that weight loss increased with age and advancing stages of disease (TNM Stage I-IV), with decreasing Karnofsky index, in Lauren's diffuse versus intestinal tumor type, and with tumors located at the cardia/esophagus.  Increasing weight loss reduced the resectability rate significantly, but no association between weight loss and postoperative complication rate was found.  The odds ratio for postoperative mortality was 2.5 to 1 for the weight loss group 5 to 10kg versus 0 kg.  In conclusion, weight loss reflects a less favorable tumor status.  Weight loss did not increase postoperative morbidity but did lead Weight to a higher death rate after surgery.
Zinc and copper in breast cancer. A joint study in northern Italy and southern France.  The relationship between breast cancer and two trace elements, zinc (Zn) and copper (Cu), was investigated by means of an hospital based case-control study at Milan (Italy) and Montpellier (France).  Variables concerning dietary intake of Zn and Cu (in Milan) and their blood levels (both in Milan and Montpellier) were measured.  Dietary intake, evaluated through a questionnaire of the dietary history type, and blood levels of Zn and Cu were measured in 261 cases and 261 controls.  Cu blood level showed a contradictory tendency in the two samples (higher in controls in Milan, higher in cases in Montpellier), which tended to lessen after adjustment for related variables.  No odds ratios (OR) in the different quantiles, nor X2 for trend reached statistical significance.  A sharp difference was evidenced on the opposite with regard to Zn blood values in cases and controls.  In both samples Zn mean values are significantly higher in cases than in controls, and the difference remains significant in the two samples even after adjustment for related variables.  The pooled OR computed from the two samples, after adjustment for known risk factors and related variables, reaches in the fourth quartile a value of 9.5 (CI: 4.9-18.2).  Dietary intake of the two minerals (measured only in Milan sample) showed no difference between cases and controls, but a stronger relationship between dietary and blood Zn was evidenced in cases with respect to controls.  The authors suggest that the higher Zn level in cases might be related with an higher incorporation of Zn in cancer cases and that the same mineral might play a possible role in tumor growth promotion.
Type II oestrogen binding sites in human colorectal carcinoma.  Seven cases of colorectal adenocarcinomas were investigated for the presence of oestrogen receptors and progesterone receptors.  The tumours specifically bound oestradiol.  This binding almost exclusively resulted from the presence of high numbers of type II oestrogen binding sites.  Oestrogen receptors were absent or present at very low concentrations.  Immunohistochemical investigation of nuclear oestrogen receptors gave negative results.  This indicates that antioestrogen receptor antibodies recognise oestrogen receptors but not type II oestrogen binding sites.  The presence of specific type II oestrogen binding sites and progesterone binding offers further evidence for a potential role for these steroids and their receptors in colorectal carcinoma.
Improved silver staining of nucleolar organiser regions in paraffin wax sections using an inverted incubation technique [published erratum appears in J Clin Pathol 1991 Jun;44(6):528]  A new simple modification to the silver staining of nucleolar organiser regions (AgNORs) was devised which, by performing the incubation with the slide inverted, results in minimal undesirable background staining, a persistent problem.  Inverted incubation is facilitated by the use of a commercially available plastic coverplate.  This technique has several additional advantages over other published staining protocols.  In particular, the method is straightforward, fast, and maintains a high degree of contrast between the background and the AgNORs.
Neuromesenchymal hamartoma of the small bowel.  We present the case of a long small bowel stricture with pathological features similar to those described as "neuromuscular and vascular hamartoma," showing in addition extensive fatty submucosal infiltration and fibrous intramural nodules.  In the controversy about the nature of this disorder, we consider it a separate entity.  Taking into account that other mesenchymal tissues than the originally described can participate, we propose the alternative term of "neuromesenchymal hamartoma" of the small bowel.
Pharyngeal adenocarcinoma with intestinal features.  A high grade adenocarcinoma arising primarily in the pharynx of a 67-year-old man is presented.  A CT-scan revealed a tumour mass growing in the pharynx, largely affecting parapharyngeal soft tissues.  Lymph node metastases were found at clinical presentation.  Both morphological and immunohistochemical studies displayed similar features to those of intestinal origin.  To our knowledge, no previous examples of such neoplasm have been reported at this site.  Its possible histogenetical origin is discussed.
Cystic hygroma: massive recurrence in adult life.  Cystic hygroma is considered a disease of childhood.  It may appear for the first time in adult life but recurrence by that stage is rare and may present difficulties in diagnosis due to previous treatment.  The authors present a case where early pharmacological intervention may have prevented a potentially life threatening situation.  The world literature is also reviewed.
Papillary adenocarcinoma of the middle ear.  A case of papillary adenocarcinoma of the middle ear is presented.  The patient had an unusually short history of otalgia, aural discharge and facial palsy, and, at presentation the tumour was too large for surgical resection to be a feasible option.  The management of this rare tumour is discussed and the relevant literature reviewed.
Trends in female breast cancer in Connecticut and the United States.  Trends for female breast cancer were examined by age, period and cohort for the years 1950-1984 in U.S.  mortality.  Connecticut mortality and Connecticut incidence.  Birth cohort patterns were evident for all three sets of data.  The results confirm a continuing increase in invasive breast cancer by providing evidence of a strong birth cohort pattern, over a time series of 90 years of birth cohorts.  This trend appears to be real for the most part because of the cohort patterns and because there is minimal underdetection in data obtained by autopsy and blind biopsy.  Secondly, when cohort modeling is applied to breast cancer mortality, there is an indication of a modest decline in recent breast cancer mortality (in the face of an apparent long-term increase), which suggests that control of breast cancer mortality may have developed in recent decades, perhaps through earlier detection and improved treatment.  Finally, in contrast with a prior report, there is little evidence for a clinically important difference in time trend between pre- and postmenopausal breast cancer.
Recent life change and large bowel cancer. Data from the Melbourne Colorectal Cancer Study.  In a large, population based, epidemiological study of colorectal cancer, The Melbourne Colorectal Cancer Study, several etiological factors were investigated.  Persons' recent life changes, as well as the degree of upset they experienced as a result of these changes, were included.  Interviews with 715 histologically confirmed new cases of colorectal cancer occurring over a 12-month period in Melbourne, Australia, and with 727 age and sex matched community controls were conducted.  As one of the methods of assessing any effect of recall bias, 179 hospital controls were also investigated.  Major illness or death of a family member, major family problems and major work problems were found to be significantly more common for cases over the 5 years preceding diagnosis compared to controls.  Cases also reported being significantly more upset with their recent life changes than did controls.  No significant differences in results were found between males and females, or between colon cancer and rectal cancer patients.  Although the possibility of recall bias, was not completely controlled for in this study, it was probably not an important factor in explaining case-control differences.  Recent life changes, and their perceptions, may have significance in the development of large bowel cancer.
Indium-111-antimyosin scintigraphy after doxorubicin therapy in patients with advanced breast cancer   Indium-111-antimyosin (111In-antimyosin) scans were performed in 20 women with advanced breast cancer after 10 cycles of chemotherapy consisting of cyclophosphamide, 5-fluorouracil and doxorubicin (total cumulative dose of doxorubicin of 500 mg/m2).  Antimyosin uptake in the myocardium was quantified by means of a heart-to-lung ratio (HLR).  Antimyosin uptake in the myocardium was observed in 17/20 (85%) patients, and HLR after chemotherapy was 1.86 +/- 0.25.  Left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) was determined before and after chemotherapy.  Patients with decreased EF (8/20, 40%) presented with more intense antimyosin uptake (HLR of 2.11 +/- 0.10 versus 1.70 +/- 0.16 (p = 0.01].  HLR values correlated with EF values after chemotherapy (r = -0.47, p less than 0.05).  Positive antimyosin studies after chemotherapy including doxorubicin, indicate the presence of myocardial damage in these patients.  Antimyosin studies are a sensitive method to detect myocyte damage in patients after doxorubicin therapy.
Indium-labeled anti-colorectal carcinoma monoclonal antibody accumulation in non-tumored tissue in patients with colorectal carcinoma.  Indium-111- (111In) labeled murine monoclonal antibodies ZCE 025 (against carcinoembryonic antigen) and CYT-103 MAb B72.3 (against tumor-associated glycoprotein - 72) have been used to image patients with colorectal cancers with encouraging results.  The objectives of this study were to assess the frequency and causes of 111In MAb localization in tumor-free, benign tissues.  Thus, scans of 75 patients who have undergone exploratory surgery following radioimmunoscintigraphy with 111In-ZCE 025 (n = 37) or 111In-CYT-103 (n = 38) were reviewed in conjunction with operative and histopathology reports.  Localization in non-tumored tissues was seen in 10.8% and 13.1%, respectively, of patients receiving ZCE 025 and CYT-103.  The most common sites involved were: degenerative joint disease, abdominal aneurysms, postoperative bowel adhesions, and local inflammatory changes secondary to surgery or external irradiation.  Review of patients' medical history and results of concurrent diagnostic modalities is likely to lessen the false-positive rate of 111In-labeled MAb scan interpretation.
6-[18F]fluoro-L-fucose: a possible tracer for assessing glycoconjugate synthesis in tumors with positron emission tomography.  The potential of 6-[18F]fluoro-L-fucose (6-[18F]FFuc) for assessing glycoconjugate synthesis in tumors with positron emission tomography (PET) was investigated.  Using the tissue sampling method with five tumor models, different time-radioactivity profiles were found: a nearly constant level in Lewis lung carcinoma (3LL) and different clearance patterns in others.  Rapid clearance in normal tissues resulted in preferable uptake ratios for tumor imaging of brain and pancreas.  Metabolic studies and the L-fucose loading effects on the tissue uptake proved the tracer to be a biochemically active L-fucose analog.  Imaging of the intracranial rat glioma and 3LL in lungs or hepatomas in mice by autoradiography (ARG) and intramuscular VX-2 carcinoma in rabbits by PET was demonstrated.  Using double-radionuclide ARG, similar distribution images of 6-[18F]FFuc and 14C-L-fucose but different tumor-to-liver uptake ratios were found.  A metastasis model seemed to show a higher uptake of both tracers as compared to a primary tumor model.
SPECT imaging of pediatric brain tumor with hexakis (methoxyisobutylisonitrile) technetium (I).  Technetium-99m-Hexamibi [Hexakis (methoxyisobutylisonitrile) technetium (i)] was developed as a myocardial perfusion agent with biologic properties similar to those of thallium-201 (201TI).  As 201TI has recently been observed to be of value for the diagnosis of brain tumors when used in conjunction with single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging technology, the possibility that the biologic similarity of the two radiopharmaceuticals extended to their affinity for tumors was tested.  A 5-yr-old female patient with a brain stem astrocytoma showed marked focal uptake of 99mTc-Hexamibi at the site of tumor recurrence as defined by biopsy and prior 201TI/SPECT study.  Tumor-to-normal cortex radioactivity ratios for the 99mTc-Hexamibi/SPECT study were 132:1 and the spatial resolution of the 99mTc-Hexamibi images was high.  This observation suggests that 99mTc-Hexamibi merits further study as a potential agent for SPECT imaging of human brain tumors.
Beta camera for static and dynamic imaging of charged-particle emitting radionuclides in biologic samples.  A detection system based on microchannel plates has been constructed to image charged particles emitted by radionuclides in biomedical samples.  This technique has significant advantages over conventional film autoradiography for investigating the distribution of radiolabeled compounds: shorter acquisition times due to the high sensitivity, easier sample handling, direct quantification and the ability to perform dynamic studies.  The detector performance shows a spatial resolution of 0.9 mm for carbon-14 (14C) (0.156 MeV), good linearity and homogeneity.  The noise level is below 50/(cm2.sec).  Successful imaging with this system has been performed with beta-emitters 14C, sulfur-35 (35S), iodine-131 (131I), yttrium-90 (90Y), and positron emitters gallium-68 (68Ga), and fluorine-18 (18F).  Dynamic studies of axonal transport of 35S-methionine in a nerve, and static images of 90Y-labeled monoclonal antibodies in slices of tumors are presented.  The system shows promise for rapid quantitative imaging of charged-particle emitting radionuclides in small biologic samples.
Modified anterior compartment resection.  In the majority of patients with soft tissue sarcomas of the anterior compartment of the thigh, it is possible to preserve a small portion of the quadriceps with intact nerve supply without compromising on the radicality of the procedure or the local control rate.  The distal one-third of the vastus medialis can usually be spared with a long, slender branch providing its innervation.  Dissection of the femoral nerve below the inguinal ligament and its branch(es) to an uninvolved area of the quadricepts the farthest from the location of the tumor is essential.  This modified anterior compartment resection improves dramatically the function of the extremity.
Granular cell neoplasm of the extrahepatic biliary tree: morphological, ultrastructural, and immunohistochemical study and review of the literature.  A recent case of a biliary granular cell tumor of the cystic duct prompted a literature review and an extensive pathological examination of the tumor in question.  A total of 44 cases have been described mostly in black females.  Most cases present with biliary symptoms, and simple surgical resection allows complete control of this benign condition.  Granular cell tumors are most likely derived from neural crest cells.
Bilateral malignant phyllodes tumours.  We report a rare example of bilateral primary malignant phyllodes tumours.  The diagnosis was supported by the identification of a benign epithelial element in each lesion.  The case illustrates the typical dimorphic features of malignant phyllodes tumours.  A contralateral tumour should not be regarded as metastatic without histological confirmation.
Migration stimulating activity in serum of breast cancer patients.  An assay to measure the ability to stimulate migration of fibroblasts into collagen gel was carried out on serum from treated and untreated breast cancer patients and from healthy controls.  Migration stimulating activity was found in the serum of 10 (83%) of 12 untreated breast cancer patients immediately before surgical resection of the primary tumour and in 9 (75%) of them 4 days after resection; in 13 (93%) of 14 patients 1-13 years after tumour resection who had received adjuvant treatment; and in 2 (10%) of 20 healthy women matched for age.  The migration stimulating activity in cancer patients' serum was indistinguishable from the migration stimulating factor produced in vitro by fetal and cancer patient skin fibroblasts in its behaviour in various biochemical fractionation procedures.  The presence of this activity in the serum of treated breast cancer patients clearly distinguishes it from other oncofetal proteins, which all seem to be produced by tumours.
The axilla: not a no-go zone   Many surgeons, particularly in the UK, give inadequate primary treatment to patients with operable breast cancer.  For spurious reasons they regard axillary clearance as unnecessarily extensive surgery and rely instead upon total mastectomy or tumour excision and node sampling, with or without postoperative radiotherapy.  But it is now clear that relapse-free and overall survival can be improved by appropriate adjuvant therapy.  Thus inadequate exploration of the axilla is doubly unjustified.  Not only is there the obvious risk of failure to remove nodes that contain metastases--so that some patients are deprived of cure by primary treatment--but the extent of tumour spread will be inadequately assessed in many more patients, with the risk that they may not receive appropriate adjuvant treatment.
Prothymosin alpha antisense oligomers inhibit myeloma cell division.  The function of prothymosin alpha has been investigated by using four different antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotides directed at selected regions of its mRNA.  In every case, when synchronized human myeloma cells were released from stationary phase by incubation in fresh medium containing antisense oligomers, cell division was prevented or inhibited; sense oligomers and random antisense oligomers had no effect.  A detailed analysis of synchronized cell populations indicated that sense-treated and untreated cells divided approximately 17 hr after growth initiation, whereas cells incubated with antisense oligomer 183, a 16-mer targeted 5 bases downstream of the initiation codon, entered mitosis approximately one cell division late.  The failure to divide correlated directly with a deficit in prothymosin alpha and with the continued presence of intact intracellular antisense oligomers over a period of at least 24 hr.  Because antisense oligomers had no effect either on the timing of the induction of prothymosin alpha mRNA upon growth stimulation or on mRNA levels seen throughout the cell cycle, we concluded that antisense DNA caused specific hybrid arrest of translation.  Our data suggest that prothymosin alpha is required for cell division.  However, there is no evidence that prothymosin alpha directly regulates mitosis.
Sequence and functional expression in Xenopus oocytes of a human insulinoma and islet potassium channel.  Regulation of insulin secretion involves the coordinated control of ion channels in the beta-cell membrane.  We have isolated and characterized cDNA and genomic clones encoding a voltage-dependent K+ channel isoform expressed in human islets and in a human insulinoma.  This K+ channel isoform, designated hPCN1, with a deduced amino acid sequence of 613 residues (Mr = 67,097), is related to the Shaker family of Drosophila K+ channels.  hPCN1 is homologous to two other human K+ channel isoforms we have isolated, hPCN2 and hPCN3, with 55% and 65% amino acid sequence identity, respectively.  The electrophysiological characteristics of hPCN1 were determined after microinjection of synthetic RNA into Xenopus oocytes.  Two-microelectrode voltage-clamp recordings of oocytes injected with hPCN1 RNA revealed a voltage-dependent outward K+ current that inactivated slowly with time.  Outward currents were inhibited by 4-aminopyridine with a Ki less than 0.10 mM and were relatively insensitive to tetraethylammonium ion or Ba2+.  A delayed rectifier K+ channel such as hPCN1 could restore the resting membrane potential of beta cells after depolarization and thereby contribute to the regulation of insulin secretion.
Dimerization of mammalian progesterone receptors occurs in the absence of DNA and is related to the release of the 90-kDa heat shock protein.  In this study we have demonstrated that dimerization of mammalian progesterone receptors (PR) occurs in the absence of DNA.  A specific immune coisolation assay was performed on extracts of T-47D human breast cancer cells with a monoclonal antibody specific for the full-length B form of progesterone receptor (PR-B).  This resulted in coisolation of significant amounts of truncated form-A receptors (PR-A), indicating the presence of stable PR-A.PR-B dimers in solution.  A positive correlation was observed between the ability of different receptor forms to oligomerize in solution and their ability to bind to specific DNA sequences.  The ability to form stable PR-A.PR-B oligomers in the absence of DNA was also found to correlate with release of 90-kDa heat shock protein (hsp90) from the unactivated PR complex.  These results support the hypothesis that dimerization in the absence of DNA is an important mechanism controlling receptor DNA-binding function and that hsp90 release may be a key step regulating dimerization.  This suggests that hsp90 may function to repress DNA-binding activity indirectly by blocking receptor dimerization.
Pancreatic tumor pathogenesis reflects the causative genetic lesion.  Transgenic mice in which c-myc expression is targeted to pancreatic acinar cells develop mixed acinar/ductal pancreatic adenocarcinomas between 2 and 7 months of age.  This contrasts with the effect on pancreas of the simian virus 40 tumor antigen or activated ras, which in adult mice causes lesions composed exclusively of acinar-like cells.  Furthermore, during an early stage of myc-induced pathology, transformed acinar-derived cells appear within islets, suggesting that islet hormones may influence the progression of these exocrine pancreatic tumors.  These findings demonstrate that the initial oncogenic alteration can influence the pattern of subsequent tumor pathogenesis and, given that human exocrine pancreatic tumors are predominantly ductal adenocarcinomas, support the suggestion that transformed acinar cells may contribute to the genesis of this serious disease in man.
Williams' vulvovaginoplasty after supralevator total pelvic exenteration.  Seven patients had delayed Williams' vulvovaginoplasty after supralevator total pelvic exenteration.  Of the three patients who died of carcinoma of the cervix (at 2, 5, and 15 months after vulvovaginoplasty), the first died before having a chance to attempt intercourse, but the other two had reported intercourse on at least two occasions after the reconstruction.  One of the patients described the experiences as neither pleasant nor unpleasant but stated that her husband seemed satisfied.  The other patient described the experience as satisfactory to both herself and her husband.  The remaining four patients are alive with no evidence of recurrent disease at 28, 42, 56, and 106 months after operation.  Two of these patients have reported entirely satisfactory sexual relations approximating pre-exenteration frequency, but the remaining two have not had sexual relations since surgery.  Both give the main reason for this as lack of opportunity.  The Williams' vulvovaginoplasty appears to be a reasonable alternative for vaginal reconstruction in patients who will have and especially who have had exenteration.  To improve results, other methods of vaginal reconstruction should continue to be evaluated.
Roentgenographic evaluation of the augmented breast.  We performed a retrospective study to determine the sensitivity of mammography in detecting breast cancer arising in women with augmented breasts.  Of eight women with breast implants in whom breast cancer developed, six had mammograms before biopsy.  Only two of the six cancers were identified mammographically (sensitivity = 33%), and one of these two was seen only in retrospect.  In both cases, the mammographic findings suggested a benign rather than a malignant process.  All eight women had a palpable mass and early disease, and all are clinically disease-free at present.  The sensitivity of mammography in detecting palpable cancers in a control group of women without implants was 92% (118 of 128).  For tumors of 2 cm or less, the sensitivity was 88% (58 of 66).  These results suggest that the sensitivity of mammography in detecting breast cancer is decreased when implants are present.  Further investigations are needed to determine the effects of prostheses on mammographic evaluations.
Scoring system for the preoperative evaluation of metastatic spine tumor prognosis.  An assessment system for the prognosis of metastatic spine tumors was evaluated for 64 cases who had undergone surgery.  Six parameters were employed in the assessment system: 1) the general condition, 2) the number of extraspinal bone metastases, 3) the number of metastases in the vertebral body, 4) metastases to the major internal organs (lungs, liver, kidneys, and brain), 5) the primary site of the cancer, and 6) the severity of spinal cord palsy.  Each parameter ranged from 0 to 2 points.  The total score obtained for each patient can be correlated with the prognosis, while being valuable in predicting it.  However, the prognosis could not be predicted from a single parameter.  In conclusion, an excisional operation should be performed on those cases who scored above 9 points, while a palliative operation is indicated for those who scored under 5 points.
Total sacrectomy and reconstruction for huge sacral tumors.  The authors carried out successful total sacrectomy in three cases, two with giant cell tumors and one with a chordoma.  The anterior and posterior approach is feasible for resecting huge sacral tumors en bloc, but it is important to reconstruct the continuity between the pelvic ring and spinal column using spinal instrumentation and sacral rods or AO plates.  As total sacrectomy is a large-scale, time-consuming, and collaborative operation, two or three teams should be used in relays.  Both pelvic and spinal surgical techniques are required.  Post-operatively the patient can stand within 3 to 6 months and well-planned rehabilitation allows ambulation.  In spite of the serious structural and neurologic damage caused, total sacrectomy can be rewarding procedure in terms of improved morbidity and mortality.
Infiltration of the lower respiratory tract by helper/inducer T lymphocytes in HTLV-1-associated adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.  The human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is the causative agent of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL), a disorder in which peripheral blood and multiple organs are infiltrated by malignantly transformed T lymphocytes.  We investigated the nature of pulmonary disease in a patient with serologic evidence of HTLV-1 infection.  In this case, endobronchial biopsy specimens showed infiltration of the bronchial mucosa by pleomorphic cells exhibiting a high degree of nuclear irregularity.  These cells were morphologically identical in appearance to malignant cells found in peripheral blood and infiltrating the dermis, expressed the OKT4/Leu3 phenotype and the receptor for interleukin 2, and, by analogy to gene rearrangement studies on leukemic blood cells, were monoclonal in origin.  However, in situ hybridization of endobronchial biopsy specimens with full-length HTLV-1 probes failed to detect retroviral RNA or proviral DNA.  These studies indicate that T lymphocytic involvement of the lower respiratory tract in HTLV-1-associated ATLL is characterized by expression of a malignant phenotype despite the inability to document actual cellular infection with this retrovirus by a molecular hybridization technique.
The diagnosis of ovarian cancer by pathologists: how often do diagnoses by contributing pathologists agree with a panel of gynecologic pathologists?  The Cancer and Steroid Hormone Study, a multicenter, population-based, case-control study of ovarian, breast, and endometrial cancer in women 20 to 54 years of age, permitted the diagnoses of contributing pathologists to be compared with those of a panel of three gynecologic pathologists.  A diagnosis of ovarian cancer was made by contributing pathologists on 477 subjects.  Agreement between the two groups of pathologists was 97% for primary epithelial ovarian cancer and 89% for primary nonepithelial ovarian malignancies.  Agreement on diagnosis of major cellular subtypes of ovarian malignancy ranged between 73% for endometrioid cancer and 100% for clear cell carcinomas.  We conclude that the diagnosis of pathologic features of primary ovarian cancer is highly predictable.  Nonetheless, diagnosis by histologic type varies sufficiently that a review process should be considered for clinical or investigative decisions involving specific histologic diagnoses of ovarian cancer.
Dissection of the cardinal ligament in radical hysterectomy for cervical cancer with emphasis on the lateral ligament.  Surgical experience with carcinomas of the uterus and rectum has provided new insights into the surgical anatomy of a lamina, which separates the paravesical space from the pararectal space.  It has been proved that each of the lamina consists of the cardinal and lateral ligaments and pelvic splanchnic nerves, descending in the following order.  The cardinal and lateral ligaments, as a connective stalk, insert into the lateral walls of the uterus and rectum extending from the inner aspect of the pelvic wall.  Clarification of this structural relationship led to the development of a new procedure for the dissection of the cardinal ligament in radical hysterectomy, while still preserving the lateral ligament.  This facilitated systematic dissection of the cardinal and uterosacral ligaments with posterior manipulation, leading to a reduction in blood loss and to prevention of brisk bleeding from the venous plexuses.
The elusive colonic malignancy. A need for definitive preoperative localization.  Colonoscopy with biopsy is the standard of practice for the diagnosis of colonic malignancies.  Unfortunately, the inability of endoscopy to obtain precise distance measurements from the anal verge can make localization of lesions at operation difficult.  For this reason, preoperative barium enema or intraoperative colonoscopy have been advocated to further pinpoint the sites of those lesions not thought to be easily located at operation.  Five patients are presented in whom malignant lesions of the colon were diagnosed and verified histologically, but were later undetectable at operation or subsequent colonoscopic examinations.  Four of these patients underwent laparotomy and three received colon resections.  None of these patients' tumors were identified during intraoperative colonoscopy, in the resected bowel on pathologic examination, or on follow-up colonoscopy.  A fifth patient is presented who spontaneously passed a polyp containing invasive adenocarcinoma, but multiple colonoscopic examinations have failed to identify the site of the lesion.  To date, none of these tumors have recurred with periods of follow-up ranging from 6 months to 2 years.  These patients demonstrate a poorly documented and little understood aspect of the behavior of colonic malignancies, i.e., the ability to spontaneously regress or slough from the bowel wall.  Based on these instances, localization of potentially malignant colon lesions is recommended with submucosal dye injections at initial endoscopy or with colonoscopy in the operating room immediately prior to operation.
The pathology of nonpalpable breast cancer.  A principal goal of mammographic screening is the early detection of breast cancer.  We reviewed records of 125 women who were referred because of nonpalpable, suspicious abnormalities on mammogram, which subsequently proved to be cancer, requiring mammographic localization biopsy and subsequent surgery for therapy.  We found that 72 (57.6%) had invasive tumors, 15 (12%) showed evidence of microinvasion and 38 (30.4%) were noninvasive.  A total of 115 patients had lymphadenectomy as part of their definitive surgery.  Nine (12.7%) of the patients with infiltrating tumors had between one and 10 malignant nodes on histologic section.  None of the patients with noninvasive or microinvasive tumors were found to have involved nodes.  The mammographic abnormalities which led to biopsy in our series were: calcifications in 74 (59.2%) patients, mass lesions in 39 (31.2%), mass lesions with calcifications in 11 (8.8%), and asymmetry in one (0.8%).  Of the nine patients with nodal metastases, seven (77.8%) had a mass with or without calcifications as the indication for biopsy.  Increasing tumor size was found to correlate with invasive tumors on histopathologic examination and the incidence of lymph node metastases.  Thirty-seven (54.4%) of the patients with infiltrating tumors had a tumor size greater than 1 cm.  Further, seven (77.8%) of the nine lymph node positive patients had tumors between 1 and 3 cm in size.  Of note, however, is that two (22.2%) patients with microscopic tumors had involved nodes.  The 4-year actuarial survival in patients with infiltrating tumors was 85.2 per cent, while that for patients with noninvasive or microinvasive tumors was 100 per cent (median follow-up of 20 months).
Intravenous administration of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor causes a cutaneous eruption   The intravenous administration of recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor to three patients with leukemia who were receiving marrow aplasia-inducing chemotherapy resulted in the development of wide-spread erythematous macules and papules.  The course of the eruption paralleled the time of infusion of the granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor.  Skin biopsy specimens taken from two of the eruptions displayed characteristic changes consisting of a variable mixture of granulocytes and lymphocytes, increased number and size of dermal macrophages, mild to moderate epidermal exocytosis, intercellular edema, and rare dyskeratotic keratinocytes.  Immunophenotypic analysis of one specimen was notable for keratinocyte intercellular adhesion molecule-1 expression.  Administration of the recombinant human cytokine in pharmacologic doses is postulated to induce changes in the immunologic status of the skin, resulting in the expression of a cutaneous eruption.
Intraepithelial anchoring fibril components.  Cultured human keratinocytes and cultured human cervical carcinoma cells (ME-180) contained intracellular pools of antigens that reacted with the anchoring fibril antibodies AF1 and AF2.  In keratinocytes, these antigens formed a basement membrane-like structure near the apical portions of the cells.  Using flow cytometric techniques, pretreatment of the ME-180 cells with acetone revealed large intracellular pools of antigen.  The intracellular epitope was calcium sensitive.  Some forms of recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa have retention of intracellular portions of the anchoring fibril suggesting a relation of the intracellular anchoring fibril antigens to that disease.
Familial multiple desmoplastic trichoepitheliomas.  A kindred with familial multiple desmoplastic trichoepitheliomas is described.  Desmoplastic trichoepitheliomas should be added to the group of lesions that indicate an inherited pattern when they occur as multiple primary tumors.  The implications for nosologic status and treatment of desmoplastic trichoepitheliomas are considered.
In vivo ultraviolet irradiation of human skin results in profound perturbation of the immune system. Relevance to ultraviolet-induced skin cancer [published erratum appears in Arch Dermatol 1991 Sep;127(9):1368]  Ultraviolet exposure of human skin deletes the function of antigen-presenting Langerhans cells normally resident within the epidermis.  Langerhans cells are capable of activating T-lymphocytes by presenting antigens (such as nickel or tumor antigens) to T-lymphocytes.  Such activated T-lymphocytes may be involved in the development of contact dermatitis and the immune surveillance of immunogenic skin cancers.  Deletion of the function of Langerhans cells does not result in abrogated epidermal antigen presentation since ultraviolet irradiation simultaneously induces the appearance of another epidermal antigen-presenting cell population that is distinct from the Langerhans cell population and seems to induce suppression of the immune response.  Suppression of the immune response following ultraviolet irradiation in murine models is critical for growth of immunogenic ultraviolet-induced skin neoplasm.  Thus, ultraviolet irradiation of human skin may facilitate the growth of human neoplasms, and the spreading of skin-associated infections due to induction of suppressor T cells.
Drug response of head and neck tumors in native-state histoculture.  We describe a chemosensitivity testing of head and neck tumors, in which a native-state histoculture, ie, a three-dimensional culture system that maintains important in vivo properties, including tissue architecture, was used.  Fifteen specimens of head and neck tumors were evaluated for sensitivity to the following drugs: cisplatin (DDP) at concentrations of 1.5, 15, and 37.5 micrograms/mL; fluorouracil at concentrations of 4.0, 40, and 100 micrograms/mL; and combinations of cisplatin and fluorouracil in corresponding doses.  Growth and measurement of drug responses were successfully completed in 10 specimens (five others were contaminated, four of them prior to instituting rigorous antibiotic washes).  The results indicated cisplatin sensitivity in five of 10 patients; fluorouracil sensitivity in four of 10 patients; and fluorouracil-cisplatin sensitivity in seven of eight patients.  Our preliminary results indicate that the native-state histoculture technique is feasible to test chemosensitivity of head and neck tumors.
Progress and challenges in psychosocial and behavioral research in cancer in the twentieth century.  Research in the psychosocial and behavioral aspects of cancer has shown steady growth since the 1950s, and its course of development has paralleled the history of medical techniques in treating cancer.  Table 1 outlines this parallel evolution from the 1850s to the 1960s.  The roles of the American Cancer Society and the National Cancer Institute (NCI) in spearheading and nurturing research in this area are documented.  Interest in psychooncologic questions can be traced back for centuries to the search for etiologic factors and psychologic variables that would explain individual vulnerability to cancer.  The first psychologic studies of cancer patients were reported in 1951 and 1952 from the Massachusetts General Hospital and Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, respectively.  The 1970s saw new interest in psychosocial and behavioral research with many issues being addressed for the first time: better care of the terminally ill through more humanistic approaches including better means of pain control; ethical concerns related to patient rights and their status as subjects in experimental protocols; trying to measure quality of life for cancer patients on protocols; seeing the need for multidisciplinary collaborative groups to make up for the absence of formal training in this area; and the need to design valid, accurate measuring scales specific to the symptomology of patients with cancer.  Table 4 outlines how the 1980s gave increasing recognition and support to the psychosocial dimensions of cancer.  This period produced a series of key conferences that examined a broad research and education perspective and produced recommendations that remain a benchmark in regard to instrumentation, conceptual models, pitfalls of psychosocial research, training, and education, and the organization of research efforts.  New precision has been added to the field in the past 6 years: studies measuring concurrent psychologic, endocrine, and immune function; use of statistical modeling to incorporate quality of life data as a correction factor in survival data (TWiST and QALY); and broadened definitions of medical outcome to include functional status, thus allowing advances in psychiatric measurements to help answer questions in cancer.  The challenges for the 1990s are identified in a summary in Table 9.  Especially noteworthy is the observation that the comprehensive research needed today cannot be carried out by any one discipline alone.  New approaches call for areas of the social sciences formerly inactive in cancer research (e.g., anthropology) to contribute the tools and expertise required to address the problems.
Social environment and social support.  Research on the relevance of social support to cancer has been plentiful since the first American Cancer Society workshop on methodological issues in behavioral and psychosocial science.  Nonetheless, critical shortcomings continue to characterize the attempt empirically to establish such things as the extent to which social support predicts adjustment to cancer diagnosis and treatment.  Prominent among these is the failure to adequately address large elements of the social structure, such as social class and urbanization, and to investigate how they shape the well being of persons with or at risk for cancer and their caregivers.  We recommend that more psychosocial research on the link between social support and cancer be conducted within populations beset by poverty and without adequate access to health care.  Funding is needed for the training and maintenance of multidisciplinary and multicultural teams of researchers working within community-based organizations and hospitals serving the underserved.
Social support and the cancer patient. Implications for future research and clinical care.  This review assesses past progress, current practices, and future needs in research and clinical practice involving the social support needs of cancer patients.  A review is given of the various conceptualizations of the social support/stress paradigm and of the state of the art of measuring social support.  Then the current work in the field of social support and cancer is considered and an argument is made for the use of social support measures, which are relevant to the experiences of the cancer patient.  Potential adaptations of an existing instrument (the Duke-UNC Functional Social Support Scale) are demonstrated, and a taxonomy of stages of cancer that would require additional types of social support measures and interventions is outlined.  Interventions are discussed in terms of the traditional support groups as well as interventions by the oncologist and primary care physician.  An argument is made for the inclusion of quality of life or functional measures as outcomes in clinical trials and the care of the cancer patient.  Finally, the need to address the existential, philosophic, or religious issues surrounding cancer and its treatment is discussed.
Needs and recommendations for behavior research in the prevention and early detection of cancer.  Because life-style patterns affect many cancer risks, research on health-risk behavior and behavior change is critical to cancer prevention.  This report recommends priorities for the next decade of psychosocial research on cancer prevention and detection.  The leading priority for future research is to fill gaps in basic knowledge left by the rush to intervention and outcome studies.  Such research must be theoretically driven and should aim to develop broad principles applicable to diverse health behaviors.  Studies that include relevant process data on various stages of behavior change are considered more desirable than simple outcome studies.  Epidemiologic investigations should be expanded to include measures of relevant behaviors, so that their impact on clinical outcomes might be established.  More research is needed on lay perception of health risks and on individual and health-system barriers to effective cancer prevention and detection.  Studies that address the needs of minority and underprivileged populations are crucial.  Funding agencies' narrow categorical mandates impede interdisciplinary research on multiple risk factors and their interactions; these boundaries must be relaxed to promote such approaches.  Funding agencies should also consider basic research as a long-term investment towards the development of effective interventions.
Epidemiologic perspectives on life-style modification and health promotion in cancer research.  The clinical, patient-oriented focus of medicine and psychology is contrasted with the epidemiologic (public health) approach in assessing the role of life-style factors and health promotion in cancer research.  The unifying host-agent-environment epidemiologic paradigm is applied to contemporary cancer prevention issues, principally smoking cessation and dietary modification, to demonstrate differences in inferences, prevention strategies, and research opportunities.  An integration of population-based approaches with the dynamics of patient behavior and risks for cancer is especially salient when considering the role of psychosocial stress and personal and social resources.  The social epidemiologic perspective, the study of the psychosocial determinants of physical health status, offers one approach for resolving the outlined differences in perspectives and is particularly relevant for understanding the etiology of life-style behaviors and how they might be altered.
Psychoneuroimmunology. Implications for oncology?  Accumulating evidence indicates that the central nervous system (CNS) may regulate the activity of the immune system.  Although the overall significance of the immune system in cancer remains controversial, psychosocial influences on immune function could potentially provide a mechanism to account for some of the reports of an association between psychosocial factors and cancer prognosis.
Scientific inquiry in childhood cancer psychosocial research. Theoretical, conceptual, and methodologic issues in the investigation and behavioral treatment of procedure-related distress.  This paper discusses the current status of scientific inquiry in childhood cancer psychosocial research.  The investigation and behavioral treatment of procedure-related distress serves as a model for illustrating and outlining some of the theoretical, conceptual, and methodologic issues and problems that exist in the area of childhood cancer psychosocial research.  Specifically, issues related to the process of scientific inquiry, theoretical/conceptual modeling, measurement and assessment, and behavioral treatment strategies are discussed.  Examples of how these issues have been addressed in our investigations of procedure-related distress are presented and recommendations for facilitating growth and development in the field of childhood cancer psychosocial research are offered.
Quality of life research in oncology. Past achievements and future priorities.  The status of quality of life research in oncology is assessed, and priorities for future research with regard to conceptual and theoretical developments, focus and content of research, research designs and practical strategies for research implementation, and transferring information to clinical practice and medical policy decision-making are identified.  There is general agreement that quality of life is a subjective and multidimensional construct, yet comprehensive theoretical models have not been developed and applied fully.  We recommend that future research be based on conceptual models that explicate the interrelationships among quality of life domains throughout the stages of cancer care.  These models, and the longitudinal research that follows from them, should attend specifically to cross-class and cross-cultural issues to avoid overgeneralization from theory and research that are based largely on the views of the majority culture.  We encourage the inclusion of this theory-based quality of life assessment as a standard component of clinical trials.  Success in this endeavor will require additional standardization of quality of life measures for use across a range of cancer patient populations, including the development of age-specific norms and instruments designed to assess the entire family system.
Methodologic issues in assessing the quality of life of cancer patients.  Although quality of life assessments have been employed successfully in descriptive and evaluative studies in oncology, their use in cancer clinical trials has, to date, been limited.  A range of issues have impeded the conduct of clinical trial-based quality of life investigations.  These include: the absence of theoretical models to guide the development of quality of life measures; over-reliance on ad hoc approaches to quality of life assessment; and insufficient attention to the practical constraints operating in clinical research settings.  Of primary importance is the need to develop multidimensional quality of life instruments that are brief and psychometrically robust.  It is suggested that future work on instrument development focus on refining currently available generic or cancer-specific measures, and on developing new diagnostic-specific questionnaire modules.  This psychometric work should be guided by appropriate theoretical models of the relationship among health-related quality of life domains.  Although it is widely accepted that the patient represents the most appropriate source of quality of life data, it is suggested that efforts also be directed toward improving the validity and reliability of physician-generated assessments of patients' performance status and of treatment toxicities, and toward determining the feasibility of employing family members as proxy raters of the psychologic and social health status of patients who are unwilling or unable to provide such information.  Additional attention should be paid to the many logistical problems that arise in clinical trial-based quality of life investigations.  In particular, research designs and data collection procedures should be selected that minimize patient, medical staff, and institutional burden.
Quality-of-life-adjusted survival for comparing cancer treatments. A commentary on TWiST and Q-TWiST.  In chronic disease situations where treatment comparisons favor no particular therapy, or where definitive outcome requires a considerable follow-up period, it is useful to have additional and perhaps intermediate endpoints of relevant clinical significance to compare treatments.  One such endpoint is Time Without Symptoms and Toxicity (TWiST) which, together with Q-TWiST, attempts to address the quality of life of patients receiving the competing regimens.  This paper provides a commentary on these techniques with an emphasis on the problems inherent in implementing Q-TWiST, a measure that attempts to incorporate patient value preferences into TWiST.  It is argued that while Q-TWiST is intuitively appealing in the clinical setting, there are formidable design and psychometric hurdles that must be overcome to fully operationalize the concept.
Progress in psychosocial and behavioral cancer research. The need for enabling strategies.  A major component of the Second Workshop on Methodology in Behavioral and Psychosocial Cancer Research was a discussion of enabling strategies, that is, strategies by which future goals and needs in the area of psychosocial and behavioral oncology might be accomplished.  This report describes and comments on the discussion that took place at a special plenary session at which representatives from four funding agencies, the American Cancer Society, National Cancer Institute, National Institute of Mental Health, and National Science Foundation, presented their views and their agencies' programs for promoting research in psychosocial and behavioral oncology.  It is concluded that much progress has been made in the field and that strategies are in place for ensuring continued progress.  However, suggestions are also made for new strategies that might accelerate and broaden that progress.
Behavioral and psychosocial cancer research. Building on the past, preparing for the future.  This report identifies five general conclusions that emerged from the Second Workshop on Methodology in Behavioral and Psychosocial Cancer Research.  These conclusions address diverse topics, including a focus on areas other than methodology; an emphasis on the transfer of technology and knowledge to applied settings; a recognition of the role of basic behavioral research in answering clinical questions; the need to recognize and strengthen ties between the field of behavioral and psychosocial oncology and the basic behavioral and social science fields from which it emerged; and the importance of additional research on minorities and other special populations.  It is suggested that meeting the challenges posed in each of these five areas is critical to continued progress in the field.
Fertility-sparing treatment of patients with ovarian cancer.  The variety of malignant neoplasms produced by the ovary are legion.  Each must be considered individually in the young woman with early disease who wishes to preserve her childbearing capability.  The risks of conservative surgery are often low, and the patient can be so advised.  Careful monitoring of this group of patients is essential regardless of the approach.
Chromogranin A: posttranslational modifications in secretory granules.  The primary structure of chromogranin A indicates multiple domains which might be subject to posttranslational modification.  We explored chromogranin A's proteolytic cleavage, glycosylation, and possible intermolecular disulfide links, using biochemical and cell biological approaches.  Anti-chromogranin A region-specific immunoblots on chromaffin granules suggested bidirectional endoproteolytic cleavage of chromogranin A; control experiments ruled out artifactual cleavage during granule isolation or lysis.  Isolation of chromogranin A-derived peptides by gel filtration chromatography or sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), followed by N-terminal amino acid sequencing, established several cleavage sites, including at least two at dibasic sites.  Secretion of chromogranin A from bovine chromaffin cells did not initiate further cleavage, nor did prolonged exposure of secreted chromogranins to the secretory cells.  The chromogranin A cleavage pattern was qualitatively similar in other neuroendocrine tissues, though cleavage was more complete in adrenal medullary than in anterior pituitary hormone storage vesicles, and N-terminal fragments of 45 and 55 kilodaltons were more prominent in the hypothalamus.  A similar cleavage pattern was seen in human pheochromocytoma granules, as judged by chromogranin A region-specific immunoblots, fragment isolation by SDS-PAGE, and microsequencing.  The presence of full-length chromogranin A as the core protein of a chromaffin granule soluble proteoglycan was suggested in bovine (but not human) chromaffin granules by glycoprotein staining, chondroitinase ABC digestion, chemical deglycosylation, and region-specific immunoblotting.  Human (but not bovine) chromogranin A displayed intermolecular disulfide crosslinks on SDS-PAGE gels and immunoblotting.  These results document diverse structural paths that the chromogranin A molecule may take in endocrine secretory cells after its translation.
Comparison of FRTL-5 cell growth in vitro with that of xenotransplanted cells and the thyroid of the recipient mouse.  The present work was designed to compare in vitro cell growth kinetics with in vivo growth under conditions as similar as possible using labeling with [3H]thymidine.  To this purpose, FRTL-5 cells were cultured as monolayers and as three-dimensional spheroids embedded in collagen gels and transplanted simultaneously into nude mice treated with perchlorate and a low iodine diet.  The growth of the transplants was compared to that of the thyroids in host mice.  In the intact thyroid, the fraction of [3H]thymidine-labeled follicular cells (FLC; 24-h labeling) increased sluggishly to a maximum of 10% after 3 weeks of goitrogen exposure, with a subsequent autoregulatory decrease to 3% at 7 weeks.  A 4-fold higher FLC was found in six adenomas, indicating focal failure of growth-restraining mechanisms.  In nonconfluent monolayer cultures the FLC was as high as 90%, even within large individual clusters where cells are in tight mutual contact.  Solid, highly cellular grafts growing from transplanted monodispersed cells showed an average FLC of 20%, which is 5 times higher than the FLC in the identically stimulated mouse thyroid.  In collagen-embedded cells, forming three-dimensional spheroids, the mean FLC decreased from 70% at 1 week in vitro (40% in vivo) to 20% at 3 weeks both in vitro and in vivo, suggesting effective auto-regulation of excessive growth in both conditions.  However, these FLC were again much higher than the 3% FLC in simultaneously assessed host thyroids.  The difference remained throughout the 45-day period studied.  We conclude that FRTL-5 cells growing as monolayers and as three-dimensional spheroids in vitro or after xenotransplantation in vivo invariably show much higher proliferation rates under comparable environmental conditions than the normal follicular epithelium in the thyroids of host mice.  The one exception is the confluent monolayer with near-zero growth, while densely packed three-dimensional transplants still grow intensively.  Although growth-retarding cell to cell interactions are also clearly operative in growing FRTL-5 cells, they are less effective than those dampening the replication rate of the thyrocytes within the monolayer hull of normal follicles.  A local failure of these mechanisms, allowing growth rates comparable to those of grafted FRTL-5 cells results in adenoma formation in normal thyroids.  These observations call for caution in the transfer of in vitro growth studies with FRTL-5 cells to in vivo conditions prevailing in the normal thyroid.
Regulation of pancreastatin release from a human pancreatic carcinoid cell line in vitro.  The objective of these experiments was to investigate the influence of activation of three second messenger systems (protein kinase-C, adenylate cyclase-cAMP, and calcium mobilization) on the secretion of pancreastatin (PST) and chromogranin-A (CGA) by a human pancreatic carcinoid cell line (BON) in tissue culture.  Stimulation of protein kinase-C by a phorbol ester (0.025-7.5 microM) caused a significant dose-related release of PST (186 +/- 22-4271 +/- 228% over controls).  Treatment of BON cells with graded doses of 8-bromo-cAMP (0.14-3.0 mM) and isobutylmethylxanthine (IBMX; 0.01-1.0 mM) also stimulated a dose-related release of PST (107 +/- 22-284 +/- 28 and 16 +/- 12-1076 +/- 100% over controls, respectively).  Incubation of BON cells with ionomycin (0.134-13.4 microM) increased the release of PST (102 +/- 15-554 +/- 21% over controls) in a dose-related manner.  A combination of IBMX and ionomycin resulted in an additive effect, whereas treatment with a phorbol ester plus IBMX resulted in a synergistic effect on PST release.  Pretreatment of BON cells with monensin, an agent that prevents processing of precursors to smaller peptides, significantly decreased PST, but not CGA, secretion in response to phorbol ester or ionomycin.  These findings indicate that protein kinase-C, cAMP, and Ca2+ mobilization participate in CGA and PST secretion.  Although the observation that secretions of PST and CGA in response to theophylline are quantitatively associated, the absence of a quantitative relationship in the release patterns of PST and CGA in response to phorbol ester and ionomycin do not support a simple precursor-product relationship between CGA and PST.  The monensin experiments are consistent with the notion that PST is derived from CGA in BON cells.
Regulation of the truncation of luteinizing hormone receptors at the plasma membrane is different in rat and mouse Leydig cells.  Regulation of the truncation of LH receptors was investigated in two types of mouse tumor Leydig cells (MA10 and MLTC-1), rat testis Leydig cells (RTL), and a rat tumor Leydig cell (R2C).  Receptor numbers were measured by binding [125I]hCG to the cells cultured in monolayers.  Addition of 3.3 nM LH for 2 h at 34 C had no detectable effect on binding sites in RTL or R2C cells, but in MA10 and MLTC-1 cells it caused a loss in binding sites.  The effect on MA10 and MLTC-1 cells could be mimicked by inhibiting receptor internalization with 5 mM NaN3 and prevented by the addition of protease inhibitors.  Incubating RTL and R2C cells with protease inhibitors caused a 2- to 3-fold increase in binding sites and a 2- to 3-fold increase in LH (0.033 and 0.33 nM)-stimulated cAMP production.  When RTL and MA10 cells were incubated in the presence of [125I]hCG, a radioactive protein complex with an approximate mol wt of 80,000-90,000 was released into the incubation medium.  We conclude that LH receptors are regulated by proteolysis at the plasma membrane in both mouse and rat Leydig cells.  Furthermore, truncation of the LH receptor in the mouse Leydig cells is involved in down-regulation, whereas in the rat it is a continuous process.
Breast cancer screening in older women: practices and barriers reported by primary care physicians.  Annual mammography, in combination with clinical breast examinations, can reduce mortality from breast cancer.  However, surveys of both patients and physicians suggest that mammography is underutilized.  This study examined whether physicians' reported breast cancer screening practices and barriers to mammography varied with patients' age.  Data from 576 primary care physicians (internal medicine, family/general practice, and obstetrics/gynecology) who participated in a mailed statewide survey were analyzed.  Physicians reported screening elderly women significantly less often than younger women, regardless of family history of breast cancer.  With the exception of medical specialty, physicians' demographic and practice characteristics were not associated with reported screening practices.  However, physicians' knowledge and beliefs about breast cancer in older women were associated with reported screening practices.  When analyzing barriers to ordering mammography, cost to the patient was viewed as a barrier for women of all ages, and pain was viewed as a greater barrier for younger women; otherwise, physicians consistently believed that their elderly patients faced considerably more barriers compared with younger women.  Further investigation is required to examine why primary care physicians report age-related differences in both breast screening and barriers to mammography.
The role of tumor-derived cytokines on the immune system of mice bearing a mammary adenocarcinoma. I. Induction of regulatory macrophages in normal mice by the in vivo administration of rGM-CSF.  Using a dimethylbenzanthracene-induced immunogenic nonmetastatic murine mammary adenocarcinoma in BALB/c mice, our previous work has shown that splenocytes from tumor bearers have reduced responses to both mitogens and Ag including tumor-associated Ag.  NK and cytotoxic T cell activities are also reduced in splenocytes of tumor bearers.  Mac-1+2+ macrophages induced in mammary tumor bearers are capable of down-regulating lymphocyte responses to mitogens and tumor-associated Ag by cell to cell contact interaction and increased PGE2 production.  We have found that the tumor constitutively releases a granulocyte-macrophage (GM)-CSF-like factor in vivo and in vitro, which may be responsible for the systemic increase in cells of the macrophage lineage in tumor-bearing mice.  A tumor cell line established from the in vivo tumor expresses and releases GM-CSF as shown by Northern and Western blot analyses.  Daily i.p.  injections for 3 wk of 10,000 U of rGM-CSF into normal mice induces hemopoietic and immunologic alterations similar to those observed in tumor bearers.  Mac-1+ and/or Mac-2+ macrophages can also be detected in the spleens and bone marrow of the mice treated with rGM-CSF.  Additionally, splenocytes from rGM-CSF-treated mice have reduced responses to mitogens and their peritoneal exudate cells can cause in vitro down-regulation of proliferative responses of lymphocytes from normal mice.  The suppression can be partially reversed by the addition of indomethacin to the cultures suggesting that PGE2 may contribute to the effect.  rGM-CSF enhances the in vitro release of PGE2 by the spleen, bone marrow, and peritoneal cells of normal mice.  These data indicate that the high levels of GM-CSF constitutively produced by the tumor may be responsible for the hemopoietic changes and immunologic alterations observed in tumor-bearing mice.
Insulin-like growth factors are mitogenic for human keratinocytes and a squamous cell carcinoma.  Normal adult human keratinocytes in monolayer culture and SCL-1, a skin-derived squamous-cell carcinoma cell line, were investigated for the expression of receptors for insulin-like growth factors (IGF) and insulin.  As demonstrated by affinity crosslinking, radiolabeled IGF-1, IGF-2, and insulin bound specifically to both cell types.  Each cell expressed type I IGF receptors, with affinity for IGF-1 greater than IGF-2 much greater than insulin.  Insulin receptors, with highest affinity for insulin, were also present on both cells.  However, keratinocytes and SCL-1 cells differed in 125I-IGF-2 binding.  125I-IGF-2-bound to both type I and type II IGF receptors in normal keratinocytes, but bound predominantly to membrane-associated IGF binding proteins in SCL-1.  IGF-1 was slightly more potent than IGF-2 in stimulating growth of both keratinocytes and SCL-1 cells.  In keratinocytes, concentrations of IGF-1 ranging from 5-100 ng/ml, and of IGF-2 from 50-100 ng/ml, resulted in a significant increase in cell number.  At the maximum dose of 100 ng/ml, either IGF-1 or IGF-2 caused a 2.3-times increase in cell number.  In SCL-1 cells, IGF-1 was more potent than IGF-2 or insulin at lower concentrations, but either IGF-1 or IGF-2 at the maximal concentration of 333 ng/ml stimulated a 4.7-times increase in thymidine incorporation.  The stimulatory effect of insulin in SCL-1 was 10-50 times less potent than that of the IGF.  The effect of either IGF on SCL-1 was completely inhibited by the type I IGF receptor antibody alpha IR-3, suggesting that both IGFs are mitogenic through the type I IGF receptor.  Insulin action was partially blocked by alpha IR-3, suggesting that insulin can act through both the insulin and type I IGF receptors.  It thus appears that IGF-1 and IGF-2 are mitogens for normal and transformed human keratinocytes and that their actions are primarily mediated through the type I IGF receptor, whereas insulin is a mitogen through both the IGF-1 receptor and the insulin receptor.
Inositol phosphate formation in the human squamous cell carcinoma line SCC-12 F: studies with bradykinin, the calcium ionophore A23187, and sodium fluoride.  The phospholipase C (PLC)-mediated hydrolysis of membrane phosphoinositides is an important signal transduction pathway coupled to the cell-surface receptors for several hormones and growth factors.  In addition, PLC activity can be modulated by changes in intracellular calcium and activation of GTP binding proteins.  In this report, differential activation of PLC in the human keratinocyte cell line SCC-12F was studied as judged by specific patterns of inositol phosphate formation.  Several hormones and growth factors previously shown to stimulate PLC in a variety of cell types were screened for activity in SCC-12F cells.  Only bradykinin was active, stimulating the PLC-dependent generation of inositol (1,4,5) triphosphate (Ins(1,4,5)P3).  Ins(1,4,5)P3 was rapidly metabolized to inositol(1,4)biphosphate (Ins(1,4)P2) and inositol(1,3,4,5)tetrakisphosphate (Ins(1,3,4,5)P4), and subsequently degraded to inositol monophosphates.  The response elicited by bradykinin was concentration dependent (EC50 value of 50 nM), suggesting involvement of a specific bradykinin receptor.  Treatment of these cells with the calcium ionophore A23187 appeared to result in the direct formation of Ins(1,4)P2 without Ins(1,4,5)P3 as precursor.  Treatment of the cells with AIF4-, a putative activator of GTP binding proteins, resulted in the generation of inositol monophosphates as the major metabolites in the absence of detectable Ins(1,4,5)P3 formation.  Taken together, these observations suggest that the PLC complex present in SCC-12F cells can be differentially activated to yield either Ins(1,4,5)P3, Ins(1,4)P2, or InsP.  The observed effects may be due to a direct PLC-dependent hydrolysis of the appropriate membrane phosphoinositide.
Thyroid cancer.  There have been important recent advances in our understanding of the biologic nature of thyroid cancer and in the early diagnosis of the disease.  Despite these advances, there is still considerable controversy over the management of thyroid cancer, including the extent of surgery, the indications for the use of iodine-131, the effectiveness of thyroid-stimulating hormone suppression, and the prediction of outcome.  In this review, the current status of the diagnosis and management of the various types of thyroid cancer are carefully reviewed and extensively documented.
Hepatic dynamic sequential CT: section enhancement profiles with a bolus of ionic and nonionic contrast agents.  The enhancement characteristics in different portions of the liver during dynamic sequential bolus computed tomography (CT) with iodinated contrast material (DSBCT) were prospectively evaluated in 75 patients by using iothalamate meglumine, iopamidol, and iohexol (25 patients received each agent).  After baseline noncontrast CT was performed, DSBCT was performed with a 180-mL intravenous bolus administered at 2 mL/sec.  Scanning was started 25 seconds after the bolus was initiated, by using a 3-second scan time and rapid cephalocaudal table incrementation, yielding contiguous 8-mm-thick sections at a rate of nine sections per minute.  On postcontrast images, peak enhancement was 115% for iopamidol and 117% for iohexol, both of which were superior to iothalamate meglumine at 95% (P less than .05).  After peaking, enhancement then decreased for all three contrast agents, although the decline was more precipitous for iothalamate meglumine.  Enhancement on the more caudal sections with both iopamidol and iohexol was superior to that with iothalamate meglumine (P less than .05).  The data suggest that the enhancement characteristics for the two nonionic agents may be more optimal for detection of focal hepatic lesions than the ionic agent.
Linkage of early-onset familial breast cancer to chromosome 17q21.  Human breast cancer is usually caused by genetic alterations of somatic cells of the breast, but occasionally, susceptibility to the disease is inherited.  Mapping the genes responsible for inherited breast cancer may also allow the identification of early lesions that are critical for the development of breast cancer in the general population.  Chromosome 17q21 appears to be the locale of a gene for inherited susceptibility to breast cancer in families with early-onset disease.  Genetic analysis yields a lod score (logarithm of the likelihood ratio for linkage) of 5.98 for linkage of breast cancer susceptibility to D17S74 in early-onset families and negative lod scores in families with late-onset disease.  Likelihood ratios in favor of linkage heterogeneity among families ranged between 2000:1 and greater than 10(6):1 on the basis of multipoint analysis of four loci in the region.
Detection of Ki-67 proliferation rate in breast cancer. Correlation with clinical and pathologic features.  In situ determination of proliferative activity was performed on 203 breast cancers by use of Ki-67 monoclonal antibody and immunohistochemical methods.  Tumor proliferation rate was analyzed and correlated to tumor size and nodal status.  The relationship between Ki-67 proliferative activity and nuclear estrogen receptor content was also investigated on adjacent tissue sections.  Ki-67 values ranged from 1 to 75%, with a median value of 10%.  Premenopausal patients had greater Ki-67 values (median value, 14.1%) than postmenopausal ones (median value, 9.8%).  The authors observed no correlation with lymph nodal involvement, whereas a statistically significant relationship with tumor size was found (P less than 0.01).  An inverse correlation (Spearman's coefficient = -0.56; P less than 0.001) was seen between Ki-67 values and nuclear estrogen receptor content.  These results, similar to those reported for other kinetic measurements, suggest that in situ detection of Ki-67 proliferation rate is a useful method for obtaining cell cycle information.  Follow-up studies will be needed to assess an eventual prognostic relevance.
Fluorescent cytochemical detection of estrogen and progesterone receptors in breast fine-needle aspirates.  Estrogen and progesterone receptors were studied in fine-needle aspiration biopsy specimens of 56 patients with primary, recurrent, or metastatic breast carcinoma.  The ligands, 17 B-estradiol-6-carboxymethyloxine-bovine serum albumin fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC-BSA estradiol) and hydroxyprogesterone hemisuccinate bovine serum albumin tetramethyl rhodamine isothiocyanate (TMRITC-BSA progesterone), were used in the fluorescent cytochemical method.  The findings obtained from the aspirated cells with the use of the fluorescent cytochemical technique were compared with results obtained from the cell population of the same tumor after removal with the use of both the fluorescent cytochemical technique and the biochemical dextran-coated charcoal (DCC) assay.  For the needle aspirates, there was 89% concordance for estrogen receptor and 86% concordance for progesterone receptor between biochemical and cytochemical results.  A high degree of correlation was also demonstrated between fine-needle aspirates and imprint preparations with the use of the cytochemical technique.  This study suggests that the fluorescent cytochemical technique is an effective tool in assessment of estrogen and progesterone receptor content in fine-needle aspirates of primary and metastatic breast cancer.  The fluorescent cytochemical technique can be performed easily at community hospitals and is well suited for specimens of insufficient size for biochemical assay.
Evaluation of in vitro bromodeoxyuridine labeling of breast carcinomas with the use of a commercial kit.  The prognostic significance of S-phase fraction analyses of breast carcinomas has been reported by several investigators.  The Cell Proliferation Kit (Amersham Corporation, Arlington Heights, IL), which uses in vitro bromodeoxyuridine (BRDU) labeling to evaluate cell cycle kinetics without a flow cytometer or radioisotopes, simplifies this assay for the clinical-based laboratory by providing standardized reagents and recommended methods.  This study was performed to determine whether data derived from its use were comparable to published S-phase data from the use of thymidine labeling, BRDU, or other methods on breast carcinomas.  Primary infiltrating ductal carcinomas (n = 142) and primary lobular carcinomas (n = 6) showed mean and median BRDU labeling of 4.63% and 3%, 1.3% and 1%, respectively, with a range of 0-28%.  Benign lesions always had less than 3% BRDU uptake (n = 21).  Estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) status correlated with BRDU labeling (P less than 0.05), with the highest S-phase fractions in ER- and PR-negative tumors.  Correlations between BRDU uptake and histologic tumor type or size were observed.  Significant correlations between BRDU uptake and lymph node status, patient age, or histologic tumor grade were not observed.  S-phase studies of breast carcinomas using other techniques have shown similar data, therefore, the Cell Proliferation Kit appears to be a practical and useful method for in vitro S-phase analysis that allows concomitant histologic examination of the same tumor tissue sample.
Expression of blood group antigens H-2, Le(y), and sialylated-Le(a) in human colorectal carcinoma. An immunohistochemical study using double-labeling techniques.  In this study, double-labeling immunohistochemistry was used to gain insight into the coexpression or interrelationship between blood group antigens (BGA) that are differentiation antigens in the normal colon, and BGA that are sequential moieties in the same synthetic pathway.  Paired-wise Sialylated-Le(a)/Le(y) and H-2/Le(y) was studied.  The Sialylated-Le(a) and Le(y) are synthesized from type 1 and type 2 backbones, respectively.  In the normal colon, the Le(y) and Sialylated-Le(a) are expressed by cells at the base and surface of the crypt, respectively, representing undifferentiated and differentiated enterocytes.  The H-2 is considered oncofetal in nature, and is considered to be the immediate precursor in the synthesis of Le(y).  In individual cancers.  Sialylated-Lea and Le(y) were detected in different cancer cells within the same malignant glands, separately in different glands, and in different subcellular compartments of the same cell.  Both H-2 and Le(y) were coexpressed in the same individual cells in 92% of cancers expressing both these BGA.  In 50% of the cancers, the H-2 and Le(y) also were expressed separately in different malignant glands within individual tumors.  These findings indicate that, in colorectal cancers, differentiation antigens (Sialylated Le(a) and Le(y)) are expressed by different individual cells within the same malignant gland somewhat, recapitulating the normal colon crypt.  Antigens of different backbones occasionally may be expressed in the same cells but within different subcellular compartments.  Precursor accumulation is common in cancers, and antigens in the same synthetic pathway are coexpressed in the same cell.  The expression of H-2 and Le(y) in different glands (lack of coexpression) may be explained possibly by aberrant synthesis of Le(y) by an alternate pathway.
Tumor-secreted vascular permeability factor increases cytosolic Ca2+ and von Willebrand factor release in human endothelial cells.  Vascular permeability factor (VPF), a tumor-secreted heparin-binding protein (Mr approximately 38,000), is responsible for increased vessel permeability and fluid accumulation associated with tumor growth.  Vascular permeability factor also promotes the growth of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (EC) and bovine pulmonary ECs in vitro.  It is shown for the first time that guinea pig VPF (half-maximal and maximal dose approximately 0.4 and 22 pmol/l (picomolar), respectively), as well as human VPF, are potent stimuli for human ECs resulting in [Ca2+]i increases (maximal three- to fourfold) and inositol triphosphate (IP3) formation.  Unlike the maximal responses to thrombin and histamine, the [Ca2+]i response to a maximal VPF dose was preceded by a characteristic 10- to 15-second delay.  Guinea pig VPF also selectively increased [Ca2+]i in cultured aortic and pulmonary artery ECs, but not aortic smooth muscle cells, human fibroblasts, or neutrophils.  Affinity-purified rabbit antibody (raised to a synthetic peptide representing VPF N-terminal amino acids 1 to 24) adsorbed all vessel permeability-increasing activity, EC growth-promoting activity, and specifically all activity responsible for increasing EC [Ca2+]i.  Similar to other mediators that increase [Ca2+]i in cultured ECs, VPF also induced a 200% increase in von Willebrand factor release.  Together these data indicate that VPF acts directly on ECs and that rapid cellular events in its in vivo/in vitro actions are likely to involve phospholipase C activation, [Ca2+]i increase, and von Willebrand factor release.
Immunoreactivity and receptor expression of insulinlike growth factor I and insulin in human adrenal tumors. An immunohistochemical study of 94 cases.  Using immunoperoxidase methods, 94 human adrenal tumors were examined for evidence of immunoreactivity and receptor expression of insulinlike growth factor I (IGF-I) and insulin.  The frequency of IGF-I in adrenocortical carcinomas was significantly higher than that in adenomas of the adrenal glands.  The adrenocortical carcinomas showed strong intensity of staining for IGF-I, IGF-I receptors, and insulin receptors.  A significant correlation between immunoreactivity and receptor expression of both IGF-I and insulin was found only in the adrenocortical carcinomas.  The adrenocortical adenomas with Cushing's syndrome and pheochromocytomas, more than adrenocortical adenomas with Conn's syndrome, also stained strongly for insulin receptors.  Thus the IGF-I and insulin probably play a role in the growth of adrenocortical carcinoma tissues, possibly through autocrine mechanisms.  The expression of insulin receptors in adrenocortical adenomas in the presence of Cushing's syndrome and pheochromocytomas may be associated with functions.
A critical analysis of the largest reported mass fecal occult blood screening program in the United States.  Fecal occult blood testing for the detection of colon cancer remains controversial.  We performed a mass screening program from January 24, 1988, to February 19, 1988, with intensive media promotion, including 121 minutes of televised air time.  A total of 5,000 primary practitioners were notified by mail.  Hemoccult-II tests were distributed to 156,000 individuals; 55,051 (35%) were returned.  Ninety-five percent of the respondents were informed of the program by television.  A total of 3,375 persons (6%) tested positive for fecal occult blood; of these, 2,469 (73%) informed the center that they saw their physician to initiate a work-up.  Information from physicians regarding work-ups was returned on only 1,356 (55%) patients.  Diagnostic tests numbered 2,227 (1.6 tests per patient).  However, 5% had no testing, 16% had a repeat Hemoccult only, and 35% had neither a barium enema nor colonoscopy performed.  Thirty-six colorectal cancers and 212 polyps were identified.  The predictive value (i.e., number of cancers per number of patients who tested positive) increased directly by decade.  Thirty-three of 36 patients (92%) with cancer underwent either a barium enema or colonoscopy versus only 185 of 438 (42%) patients with a "negative" work-up.  Cancers found were carcinoma in situ in 10 patients (29%), Dukes A in 12 (35%), Dukes B in 4 (12%), and Dukes C in 8 (24%); distant metastases were not found in any participant.  Thirty-six percent of the tumors were located in either the right or transverse colon.  We conclude that: (1) Screening identified early cancers.  All were potentially curable and 64% were limited to the bowel wall.  (2) Massive Hemoccult distribution was possible over a short interval, but patient and physician compliance was disturbingly low.  (3) Total colonic evaluation is mandatory, since at least 36% of tumors were beyond the reach of the flexible sigmoidoscope.  (4) Many work-ups were unnecessary (repeat Hemoccults) or inadequate, indicating a need for physician education.
Factors influencing survival after pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic cancer.  Eighty-nine patients with carcinoma of the head of the pancreas underwent pancreaticoduodenectomies.  The actuarial 5-year survival for all 89 patients was 19%, with a median survival of 11.9 months.  The 81 hospital survivors were analyzed in an effort to determine factors influencing long-term survival.  Negative lymph nodes and the absence of blood vessel invasion both favored long-term survival.  The strongest predictive factor was negative lymph node status with a median survival of 55.8 months, compared with 11 months with lymph nodes involved with tumor (p less than 0.05).  Blood transfusions were also predictive, with patients receiving two or fewer units having a median survival of 24.7 months, compared with 10.2 months for those receiving three or more units (p less than 0.05).  The most important determinant of long-term survival after pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic cancer is biology of the tumor (lymph node status, blood vessel invasion).  However, performance of the resection (units of blood transfused) also appears to be an important factor influencing survival.
Implications of peritoneal cytology for staging of early pancreatic cancer.  Cytologic examination of peritoneal washings was performed in 40 patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (35 head, 5 body) whose tumors had been selected as potentially resectable by computed tomographic (CT) findings.  Saline (100 mL) was instilled and aspirated at laparoscopy in 27 patients and at laparotomy in 13.  Malignant cells were found in the peritoneal washings in 12 of 40 patients (30%): 29% in cancers of the pancreatic head versus 40% in the body; 33% at laparoscopy versus 23% at laparotomy; and in 4 of 8 patients with ascites versus 8 of 32 without ascites.  The cytology was positive in 6 of 8 patients (75%) who had a prior percutaneous needle biopsy versus 6 of 32 (19%) of those who did not (p less than 0.01).  Liver metastases were found in six patients, all with negative cytology.  One of 10 pancreatic head cancers with positive cytology was resectable versus 13 of 25 with negative cytology (p less than 0.05).  Survival was significantly longer in patients with negative cytology.  We conclude that (1) pancreatic cancer sheds malignant cells into the peritoneum early and commonly; (2) laparoscopic lavage is an effective means of cytologic study; (3) ascites is not a precondition for cytologic study, nor does its presence necessarily imply carcinomatosis; (4) intraperitoneal spread of cancer cells may be promoted by tumor biopsy; (5) cytologic findings provide an additional index of resectability; and (6) cytologic findings appear to correlate with duration of survival.  This study shows that even "localized" pancreatic cancer is often not contained and suggests caution with biopsy of potentially curable lesions.
Expression of ABH blood group antigens, Ulex europaeus agglutinin I, and type IV collagen in the sinusoids of hepatocellular carcinoma.  The expression of blood group antigens (A, B, H, Lewis(a) and Lewis(b)), Ulex europaeus agglutinin I (UEA-I), factor VIII-related antigen, and type IV collagen on the sinusoids was examined immunohistochemically in 15 cases of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC), 11 cases of cirrhosis, 12 cases of chronic active hepatitis, and in a control sample of 16 normal livers.  Sinusoidal endothelial cells of HCC characteristically showed a diffuse and strong immunoreactivity to ABH blood group antigens in the specimen with a comparable ABO blood group.  The sinusoidal endothelial cells were also diffusely and strongly positive for UEA-I receptors.  In contrast, in cirrhosis and chronic active hepatitis a few sinusoidal endothelial cells were positive for ABH blood group antigens and UEA-I receptors.  In normal livers, only a few sinusoidal endothelial cells were positive for ABH blood group antigens and UEA-1 receptors.  Tests for factor VIII-related antigen and Lewis blood group antigens were almost negative on sinusoidal endothelial cells.  Although type IV collagen was distributed diffusely in the space of Disse in these four groups, its expression was strongest in HCC.  Blood vessels of portal tracts and fibrous septa were positive for ABH blood group antigens, UEA-1 receptors, factor VIII-related antigen, and type IV collagen, but negative for Lewis blood group antigens.  These findings suggest that some sinusoidal endothelial cells undergo "capillarization" in cirrhosis and chronic active hepatitis, and that the majority of sinusoidal endothelial cells of HCC have phenotypic characteristics of capillaries.
Pleomorphic (anaplastic) neuroblastoma in nude mice.  Two pleomorphic (anaplastic) neuroblastomas, from two children aged 1 and 6 years, were transplanted into nude mice.  Two noteworthy observations were made.  In one case, the transplanted tumor gave rise to a soft-tissue sarcoma.  Moreover, in both cases hepatic metastases were associated with a striking modification of murine hepatocytes, resulting in hyperchromatic and dysplastic nuclei.  The latter finding was particularly evident in the hepatic areas surrounding all metastases of pleomorphic (anaplastic) neuroblastoma cells.
Glomus tumor of the coccyx. A curable cause of coccygodynia.  A 30-year-old woman presented with recurrent severe coccygodynia.  She underwent exploration for a possible pilonidal sinus and was found to have a precoccygeal glomus tumor that also involved bony trabeculae of the coccyx.  To our knowledge, a glomus tumor involving the coccygeal bone has not been previously documented.  In view of the relief of this patient's pain following the surgical excision of coccyx and tumor, a causal role is suggested.
Malignant mixed tumor (malignant ameloblastoma and fibrosarcoma) of the maxilla.  We present a rare case of carcinosarcoma (malignant ameloblastoma and fibrosarcoma) of the left maxilla that developed in a 63-year-old Japanese man.  The tumor recurred repeatedly despite multiple surgical removals, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy and led to progressive cachexia; the patient died after 3.8 years of hospitalization.  Histopathologic examination revealed that the recurrent tumor was carcinosarcoma, which had progressed from malignant ameloblastoma with fibroma.  An autopsy confirmed the diagnosis of malignant mixed tumor with lung metastasis of malignant ameloblastoma and fibrosarcoma.
Response by women aged 65-79 to invitation for screening for breast cancer by mammography: a pilot study [published erratum appears in BMJ 1991 Jul 27;303(6796):234]   OBJECTIVE--To determine whether there is sufficient benefit to be gained by offering screening for breast cancer with mammography to women aged 65-79, who are not normally invited for screening.  DESIGN--Pilot study of women eligible for screening but not for personal invitation.  The results of this study were compared with the results of routinely screened younger women (aged 50-64) from the same general practice.  SETTING--One group general practice in south Manchester.  PATIENTS--The 631 women aged 65-79 on the practice list.  A total of 42 (7%) were excluded by the general practitioner, and 22 (4%) invitation letters were returned by the post office.  MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES--Response rates to invitation for screening assessed by three indices: crude population coverage ratio, crude invited population coverage ratio, and corrected invited population coverage ratio.  RESULTS--344 Patients aged 65-79 (61% of those invited, excluding those who could not be traced) were screened compared with 77% of women aged 50-64.  The three response indices were higher for younger women than older: crude population coverage ratio = 66.5%, crude invited population coverage ratio = 69.3%, corrected invited population coverage ratio = 76.8% for women aged 50-64, compared with 54.5%, 58.4%, and 60.7% respectively for women aged 65-79.  All four biopsies done in the older women gave positive results, giving a cancer detection rate of 11.6/1000 compared with 4.1/1000 among younger women.  CONCLUSIONS--These results show that there is a potential for high attendance at routine screening by older women if they are invited in the same way as younger women.  If these results are found elsewhere the costs and benefits of screening older women should be reassessed.
Recreational sun exposure in Puerto Rico: trends and cancer risk awareness.  Persons who sunbathe or engage in other activities at the beach are exposed to large amounts of UV radiation.  Four hundred seven adults who visited the beaches of Puerto Rico were surveyed to determine their knowledge about the risks of sun exposure and to evaluate sunscreen use.  The group consisted of 195 year-round Puerto Rican residents and 212 tourists.  Ninety-five percent believed that the sun can cause skin cancer, although only half of the subset who lived all year in Puerto Rico believed that they personally received enough exposure to be at risk.  The majority of the group (83%) understood the meaning of the sun protection factor numbers, although 35% used either nothing or a nonscreening oil.  Half of Puerto Rican residents rarely or never used sunscreen protection while sunbathing.  When sunscreen was used, the most important factor sought was given as sun protection factor (64%), followed by a perceived ability to aid in tanning (26%).
Cutaneous angiolipoleiomyoma.  We describe eight cases of cutaneous angiolipoleiomyoma, a rare tumor previously reported only once under the term cutaneous angiomyolipoma.  Clinically, the tumors were acquired, solitary, asymptomatic nodules that were always acral in location.  Patients' ages ranged from 33 to 77 years (median 52.6 years); the male/female ratio was 7:1.  Signs of tuberous sclerosis or renal angiomyolipoma were absent in all cases.  Histologically, the tumors were subcutaneous, well circumscribed, and composed of smooth muscle, vascular spaces, connective tissue, and mature fat.  In some tumors the fat was the predominant component, and in others smooth muscle predominated.  Elastic tissue stains revealed that some blood vessels had developed an elastic lamina whereas other blood vessels lacked it.  Additional histologic features occasionally observed included vascular thrombi, glomus bodies, and focal mucin deposition.
The risk of developing subsequent nonmelanoma skin cancers.  Data from the Southeast Arizona Skin Cancer Registry collected during 1985 through June 1988 were used in this study.  Patients who had a nonmelanoma skin cancer (basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma) removed in 1985 were observed until subsequent nonmelanoma skin cancers developed or until June 30, 1988.  Twelve categories of nonmelanoma skin cancers were developed on the basis of the type of first nonmelanoma skin cancer and type of second, third, and fourth nonmelanoma skin cancers.  Analyses showed the highest risk of a subsequent nonmelanoma skin cancer developing was within 1 year (36.39%), the rate of developing another nonmelanoma skin cancer depended on type (squamous cell carcinoma, 100%; basal cell carcinoma, 44.23% to 83.65%), and total risk decreased during the 1277 days of the study.
Histologic pattern analysis of basal cell carcinoma. Study of a series of 1039 consecutive neoplasms.  This study attempts to define histologic patterns in 1039 consecutive cases of basal cell carcinoma and to correlate these patterns with adequacy of margins of surgical excision.  Five major histologic patterns were identified: nodular, 218 cases (21%); superficial, 181 cases (17%); micronodular, 151 cases (15%); infiltrative, 77 cases (7%); and morpheic, 11 cases (1%).  A mixed pattern (two or more major histologic patterns) was present in 401 cases (38.5%).  Our study indicates that nodular and superficial basal cell carcinomas can be completely removed by simple surgical excision in a high percentage of cases (93.6% and 96.4%, respectively) whereas the micronodular, infiltrative, and morpheic basal cell carcinomas have a higher incidence of positive tumor margins (18.6%, 26.5%, and 33.3%, respectively) after excision.  Mixed patterns that consisted of combinations of the nodular, micronodular, or infiltrative types exhibited a behavior similar to the pattern that resulted in a greater chance of incomplete surgical removal.
Treatment of port-wine stains during childhood with the flashlamp-pumped pulsed dye laser.  Seventy-three patients between the ages of 3 months to 14 years (average age 6 years 2 months) with port-wine stains were treated with the flashlamp-pumped pulsed dye laser.  More than 75% lightening was achieved with an average of 2.5 treatments in 33 patients (45%), 50% to 74% lightening after an average of 1.7 treatments in 31 (42%), 26% to 49% lightening after 2 treatments in 5 (7%), and less than 25% lightening after 1 treatment in 4 (5%).  The overall average lightening after one treatment was 53%.  The percentage of lightening increased as the number of treatments increased.  Three patients had 100% clearance of the port-wine stain.  Patients aged between 3 months and 6 years (44 patients) had a better response after the first treatment (55% lightening) than did patients aged between 7 and 14 years (29 patients with a 48% lightening; p = 0.027).  Complications included cutaneous depressions in four patients, hyperpigmentation in 16 patients, and hypopigmentation in three patients.  All complications were transient and disappeared completely.
Induction of DNA fragmentation in chronic B-lymphocytic leukemia cells.  Chronic lymphocytic leukemia of B cell type (B-CLL) is a neoplastic disorder characterized by the accumulation of small resting lymphocytes in the periphery.  The phenotype of these cells suggests that they are "frozen" at an early stage of maturation.  Glucocorticoid hormones are commonly used to treat patients with B-CLL, resulting in a reduction in the peripheral lymphocyte count by an undefined mechanism.  Here we report that glucocorticoids stimulate DNA fragmentation characteristic of a suicide process known as apoptosis or programmed cell death (PCD) in suspensions of cells from patients with B-CLL.  The effects can be mimicked by Ca2+ ionophore and involve a sustained increase in the cytosolic Ca2+ concentration.  Specific antibodies binding to membrane-associated IgM on the leukemic cells can also induce PCD by a similar mechanism.  Phorbol esters block DNA fragmentation and cell killing in response to all of the agents, suggesting that activation of protein kinase C desensitizes the cells to PCD.  Targeting the B-CLL cells with antibodies that induce an unbalanced, sustained Ca2+ increase may therefore represent a rational strategy for the destruction of leukemic cells.
Transforming growth factor-beta-induced inhibition of T cell function. Susceptibility difference in T cells of various phenotypes and functions and its relevance to immunosuppression in the tumor-bearing state.  The present study investigates the nature of humoral component(s) generated in tumor-bearing hosts to induce immune dysfunction of T cells.  Cell-free ascitic fluid and culture supernatant (SN) were obtained from the ascites and cultures allowing MH134 hepatoma cells to grow.  These ascites and SN samples were tested for their abilities to influence the generation of CTL responses to TNP and alloantigens.  The generation of the anti-TNP CTL responses that require self H-2-restricted CD4+ Th cells was markedly suppressed by addition of the ascites or SN under conditions in which these samples did not inhibit anti-allo CTL responses capable of using alternate pathways of allo-restricted CD4+ and CD8+ Th.  The activation of CD8+ CTL precursors and CTL activity were also resistant to the ascites or SN.  The ascites- or SN-induced suppressive effect to which CD4+ Th were most susceptible was found to be mediated by transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) activity, because: 1) the TGF-beta activity was detected in the MH134 ascites and culture SN; 2) the suppression of CD4+ Th function required for anti-TNP CTL responses was almost completely prevented by addition of anti-TGF-beta antibody to cultures and; 3) rTGF-beta also induced similar patterns of immunosuppression to those observed by ascites or SN.  These results indicate that TGF-beta produced by tumor cells induces deleterious effects on T cell, especially on the CD4+ Th subset, and provide an explanation for the molecular mechanism underlying the previously observed CD4+ Th-selective suppression in the tumor-bearing state.
Expression of VHIII-associated cross-reactive idiotype on human B lymphocytes. Association with staphylococcal protein A binding and Staphylococcus aureus Cowan I stimulation.  It has been demonstrated that staphylococcal protein A (SPA) has an "alternative" binding site with specificity for human Ig H chain V region of the VHIII subgroup.  Because the major mitogenic component of Staphylococcus aureus Cowan I (SAC) is SPA, it is possible that SAC stimulates a subpopulation of B cells expressing Ig of the VHIII H chain subgroup.  In the present study, we have investigated further the relationship between SPA binding and the expression of VHI- or VHIII-associated cross-reactive idiotype (CRI) on the surface of tonsillar B lymphocytes enriched for the expression or nonexpression of the CRI, and we examined the Ig secreted by cell lines established from these populations of B cells by EBV transformation.  The VHIII CRI (D12)-enriched population yielded 21 cell lines, with 67% of them secreting SPA-reactive Ig; in contrast, only 6% (1 of 16) of VHI CRI-expressing lines secreted SPA-reactive Ig.  The CRI-negative B cell population yielded 54 cell lines, of which 20% secreted SPA-reactive Ig, as might be anticipated because a majority of VHIII Ig+ B cells will be CRI-.  SAC stimulation of CRI+ and CRI- populations showed preferential stimulation of the D12 population.  These data support the proposal that SAC stimulation of human B cells is mediated through binding of SPA by its alternative binding site to IgV regions of the VHIII subgroup.
Intraperitoneal cisplatin and cytarabine in the treatment of refractory or recurrent ovarian carcinoma   Preclinical evaluation has suggested impressive concentration-dependent cytotoxic synergy between cisplatin and cytarabine in ovarian carcinoma.  To further evaluate the clinical relevance of these observations, 39 patients with refractory or recurrent ovarian carcinoma were entered onto a phase II trial of intraperitoneal (IP) cisplatin (100 to 105 mg/m2 per course) plus cytarabine (600 to 900 mg per course).  Treatment was administered over 2 or 3 days for a maximum of five monthly courses, followed by surgical reevaluation in patients without clinical evidence of disease.  The 3-day regimen was discontinued secondary to the development of severe thrombocytopenia (five of 12 courses platelets decreased to less than 50,000/mm3).  Additional toxicities included abdominal pain (moderate to severe at some time during therapy in 46% of patients), fever without evidence of infection (44%), and bacterial peritonitis (10%).  Three patients declined surgical reassessment.  Fourteen of 36 (39%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 23% to 55%) assessable patients demonstrated surgically defined responses, including 12 of 23 (52%; 95% CI, 32% to 72%) patients with tumor nodules less than 1 cm in diameter and only two of 13 (15%; 95% CI, 0% to 34%) patients with any lesion greater than 1 cm.  There were seven (30%; 95% CI, 11% to 49%) surgically defined complete responses (CRs) in patients with less than 1 cm disease and none in patients with larger tumor nodules.  IP cisplatin/cytarabine results in a high surgically defined response rate in patients with minimal residual ovarian carcinoma, but activity is low in patients with bulky intraabdominal disease.
Intrapleural cisplatin and cytarabine in the management of malignant pleural effusions: a Lung Cancer Study Group trial.  Malignant pleural effusions are a common and significant problem in patients with advanced malignancies.  Pleurodesis with tetracycline or other sclerosing agents is the usual treatment for malignant pleural effusions.  In contrast to this approach, intrapleural chemotherapy has the potential advantage of treating the underlying malignancy in addition to controlling the effusion.  Intracavitary cisplatin-based chemotherapy, which is cytotoxic rather than sclerosing, has proven safe and effective via the intraperitoneal route in ovarian cancer and malignant mesothelioma.  There has been little previous experience, however, with intrapleural cisplatin-based chemotherapy.  As part of a planned series of trials in malignant mesothelioma, the Lung Cancer Study Group first evaluated intrapleural cisplatin and cytarabine in patients with malignant pleural effusions from a variety of solid tumors.  From April 1986 to November 1987, 46 patients with cytologically proven, symptomatic, and previously untreated malignant pleural effusions were entered on study.  A single dose of cisplatin 100 mg/m2 plus cytarabine 1,200 mg was instilled into the pleural space via a chest tube, which was then immediately removed.  Patients were evaluated for toxicity and response at 24 hours; 1, 2, and 3 weeks; and then monthly.  No recurrence of the effusion was considered a complete response (CR).  Partial response (PR) was defined as a 75% or greater decrease in the amount of the effusion on serial chest radiographs.  One patient experienced reversible grade 4 renal toxicity, four patients had grade 3 hematologic toxicity, and five patients had grade 3 cardiopulmonary toxicity.  The overall response rate (CR plus PR) at 3 weeks was 49% (18 of 37 patients).  The median length of response was 9 months for a CR and 5.1 months for a PR.  The outcome of this trial was sufficiently encouraging that this regimen has been incorporated into subsequent trials for malignant pleural mesothelioma.
When is a prognostic factor useful? A guide for the perplexed.  Traditionally, a number of variables have been used to predict outcome in patients with early-stage breast cancer.  These tests are simple to perform and relatively inexpensive.  Recently, a number of new factors, eg, tumor proliferative index, nuclear DNA content, and amplification or overexpression of growth-promoting genes or oncogenes have been identified as potential predictors of outcome in patients with breast cancer.  There is now increasing pressure to introduce such tests into routine clinical practice.  How does a clinical practitioner identify which test, or group of tests, best predicts adverse outcome and whether any more clinically useful information is provided than with the use of more traditional factors alone? The aim of a prognostic test in breast cancer is to predict which patients are destined to develop a recurrence of cancer and those who are not.  The prognostic usefulness of a test can be expressed in terms of relative risk (RR), which is the ratio of the risk of breast cancer recurrence in patients who test positive to the risk in those who test negative.  Methodologic guidelines that should be satisfied by a study evaluating the predictive ability of a test include the following: (1) Was an inception cohort assembled? (2) Was the referral pattern described? (3) Were laboratory and clinical outcomes assessed in a blinded fashion? (4) Was complete follow-up achieved? (5) Was adjustment for extraneous prognostic factors carried out? (6) Were appropriate statistical methods used? An approach is suggested to help the clinician choose the test, or combination of tests, likely to discriminate between "high-" and "low-risk" patients in his/her own practice.  The decision regarding what particular threshold value (risk) defined by a prognostic test (or series of tests) warrants adjuvant therapy for an individual patient is a complex one but should be based on a clear presentation of the risks and benefits to the patient.
L-methionine uptake by human cerebral cortex: maturation from infancy to old age   Age-associated changes in amino acid transport from blood to normal frontal cortex were studied using positron emission tomography (PET).  Seventeen patients, 1.8-71 yr, were injected intravenously with tracer doses of [11C] L-methionine and a baseline PET scan was obtained.  To assess competitive inhibition of [11C]L-methionine uptake, patients received either oral L-phenylalanine or an i.v.  infusion of amino acids 1 hr before a second PET study.  Uptake of [11C]L-methionine by frontal cortex decreased seven-fold between 1.8 and 71 yr (r = -0.71; p less than 0.05).  Blood-to-brain transfer of [11C]L-methionine, at 4.5 yr, exceeded mean adult values by more than five-fold.  Competitive inhibition reduced L-methionine uptake in all patients older than 4.6 yr.  These developmental changes parallel findings in animals.  The neutral amino acid transport system may modulate human brain amino acid levels to meet changing developmental metabolic needs.
Clinical relevance of immunohistochemical detection of multidrug resistance P-glycoprotein in breast carcinoma   In 20 women with breast carcinoma, 17 of whom had locally advanced cancer and 3 of whom had confirmed metastases, the expression of P-glycoprotein was evaluated before the start of a chemotherapy regimen that included multidrug resistance-related drugs.  With the use of the C494 monoclonal antibody in an avidin-biotin-immunoperoxidase technique, P-glycoprotein was detected in 17 of 20 tumor samples.  Results were expressed in a semiquantitative manner, taking into account the number of positive tumor cells (N index) and the specific staining intensity (I index).  The 17 patients with nonmetastatic cancer were followed from the first cycle of chemotherapy to cancer recurrence; subsequent to six cycles of chemotherapy, all of these patients except one were rendered clinically disease-free through surgery and/or radiation.  The end point was defined as either local/regional recurrence or metastasis.  Strong P-glycoprotein-positive staining in a majority of tumor cells (the N+/I+ phenotype) was significantly correlated with no initial response to chemotherapy (P less than .02) and with a shorter progression-free survival (P less than .02).  Thus, the pretreatment evaluation of P-glycoprotein expression may be of prognostic value in patients with locally advanced breast cancer.
Phase I clinical and pharmacokinetic trial of flavone acetic acid.  Flavone acetic acid is a synthetic benzopyrone derivative with an unknown mechanism of action.  Thirty-eight patients (30 men and 8 women) were treated once a week for 4 weeks every 5 weeks with doses of flavone acetic acid ranging from 0.33 to 12.5 g/m2.  At doses less than or equal to 3.9 g/m2, the drug was administered intravenously over 1 hour; at doses greater than or equal to 5.28 g/m2, the infusion period was lengthened to 6 hours.  Treatment of all patients included hydration before and after treatment and alkalization to maintain urine pH at greater than or equal to 6.5.  A dose-limiting toxic effect was hypotension at 10 g/m2.  Pharmacokinetic studies revealed linear behavior in the eight patients studied, beginning at 3.9 g/m2.  Peak plasma levels ranged from 125 to 630 micrograms/mL, with a mean terminal half-life of 22.4 hours.  Immunologic monitoring was performed in three patients at 10 g/m2.  A transient increase in CD16- and/or Leu-19-positive cells was noted in all three patients.  In one patient, this increase correlated with a 10-fold increase in K562 cell killing.  There were no objective tumor responses seen in this trial.  The recommended phase II dose on this schedule is 8 g/m2.  Further studies to elucidate the drug's mechanism of action and to define its immunologic properties are recommended.
Tumor suppressor genes: new prospects for cancer research.  Cancer is thought to arise from the accumulation of several genetic mutations in a single cell.  Until recently, the only tumorigenic mutations that have been studied in detail are those that activate oncogenes.  The discovery of tumor suppressor genes, for which inactivating mutations elicit tumorigenesis, has added a new dimension to our understanding of neoplasia.  The retinoblastoma susceptibility gene RB is the prototype tumor suppressor gene and has been shown to suppress the transformed phenotype for several different cancers.  Additional studies have revealed other tumor suppressor genes that may operate in a variety of tissues through a variety of mechanisms.  These mechanisms may regulate the choice between cellular proliferation and differentiation and appear to involve such processes as the initiation of DNA replication, regulation of expression of certain genes, intercellular communication and adhesion, and the transduction of external signals to intracellular effectors.  The elucidation of these mechanisms will enhance our understanding of both oncogenesis and the fundamental operations of the cell.
Stress response protein (srp-27) determination in primary human breast carcinomas: clinical, histologic, and prognostic correlations   Expression of an estrogen-regulated protein known as the 27,000-d heat-shock or stress-response protein (srp-27) was evaluated in human breast carcinomas and established breast cancer cell lines.  Results obtained by Northern and Western blot analyses and immunohistochemical methods were concordant.  Immunohistochemical assessment of srp-27 expression in 300 breast carcinomas (with median patient follow-up of 8 years) was performed.  Twenty-six percent of lymph node-negative and 45% of lymph node-positive tumors were overexpressors.  Univariate analysis demonstrated significant correlations between srp-27 overexpression and estrogen receptor (ER) content, pS2 protein expression, nodal metastases, advanced T stage, lymphatic/vascular invasion, and a shorter disease-free survival period (but not a shorter overall survival) for the study population as a whole.  Regression tree analysis showed that srp-27 expression was an independent prognostic indicator for disease-free survival only in patients with one to three positive lymph nodes.  The Cox proportional hazards model confirmed the independent prognostic significance of nodal involvement, T stage, and ER content but failed to recognize srp-27 overexpression as a significant independent parameter predictive of patient outcome in the patient population as a whole.  The observed associations between srp-27 overexpression and more aggressive tumors suggest a biologic role for srp-27 in human breast carcinomas.
Therapeutic advantage of hypoxic cells in tumors: a theoretical study   The presence of hypoxic cells in solid tumors has long been considered a problem in cancer treatment, particularly for radiation therapy but also for treatment with some anticancer drugs.  Three general strategies are being actively explored to overcome the problem: oxygenating the tumor, sensitizing the hypoxic cells to radiation (or chemotherapy), or killing the hypoxic cells (with a hypoxic cell cytotoxin).  In the present study, we have examined the impact of each of these three strategies on a standard radiation therapy regimen (30 doses of 2 Gy), using either of two major assumptions: full reoxygenation or no reoxygenation of the tumor cells.  We demonstrate that a hypoxic cell cytotoxin can produce a level of tumor cell killing higher (by several orders of magnitude) than that produced by full oxygenation of a tumor or by use of an optimum hypoxic cell radiosensitizer, provided the cytotoxin kills more than approximately 50% of the hypoxic cells each time it is given.  The only assumption that makes a difference is whether reoxygenation occurs: In the worst case (ie, no reoxygenation), the hypoxic cell cytotoxin performs only as well as an optimum radiosensitizer.  The analysis shows that hypoxic cells in tumors can be a major therapeutic advantage.  Therefore, we recommend that research efforts be concentrated on development of superior hypoxic cell cytotoxins rather than improved hypoxic cell radiosensitizers and that, in parallel, emphasis be placed on development of agents to increase hypoxia.
Diffusion and binding of monoclonal antibody TNT-1 in multicellular tumor spheroids.  Tumor spheroids of HT-29 human colon adenocarcinoma and A375 melanoma were established to investigate the uptake and clearance kinetics of TNT-1, a monoclonal antibody that targets necrotic cells of tumors.  Our data reveal that there was rapid uptake of TNT-1 and its F(ab')2 fragment in both spheroid models, whereas an antibody of irrelevant specificity, Lym-1, and its F(ab')2 fragment bound poorly to the spheroids.  Unlike previously reported monoclonal antibodies to tumor cell-surface antigens, TNT-1 showed 1) a linear uptake that increased over time without saturation in tumor spheroids and 2) an unexpected uptake by a subpopulation of cells in the viable outer rim of the spheroids.  These preclinical studies provide important information concerning the therapeutic potential of TNT monoclonal antibodies for the treatment of cancer and micrometastases.
Longitudinal study of women with negative cervical smears according to endocervical status   A longitudinal study of 20,222 women who received negative cervical smear reports in 1987 showed that the incidence of definite or equivocal cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) was not significantly different between those whose first smear lacked an endocervical component and those whose smear included an endocervical component.  The incidence of definite cytological evidence of CIN was significantly lower in women whose first smear did not include an endocervical component.  It is concluded that women whose smears are reported as negative but lack an endocervical component should not be rescreened any earlier than women with negative smears that include an endocervical component.
Chromogranin A storage and secretion: sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma.  Chromogranin A, co-stored and co-released with catecholamines from adrenal medullary and sympathetic neuronal vesicles, is elevated in the plasma of patients with pheochromocytoma.  The usefulness of the hormone in the differential diagnosis of hypertension is examined.  An elevated level of chromogranin A had comparable diagnostic sensitivity (83%, 24/29) to, but greater diagnostic specificity (96%, 86/90) than the level of plasma catecholamines when subjects with pheochromocytoma (n = 29) were evaluated in comparison to several reference groups, including normotensive controls (n = 49), subjects with essential hypertension (n = 28), subjects with renovascular hypertension (n = 5), and subjects with primary aldosteronism (n = 3).  Subjects with signs or symptoms suggesting pheochromocytoma, but in whom the diagnosis was ultimately ruled out (n = 5) had normal plasma levels of chromogranin A.  A modest rise in chromogranin A in those with essential hypertension, and correlation of chromogranin A with diastolic blood pressure in normotensive patients and patients with essential hypertension did not impair the diagnostic usefulness of chromogranin A for pheochromocytoma.  Renal failure was associated with an elevated plasma chromogranin A independently of blood pressure.  Plasma chromogranin A correlated with tumor mass, tumor chromogranin A content, tumor norepinephrine content, and urinary vanillylmandelic acid excretion; it did not correlate with plasma or urinary catecholamines, nor with blood pressure in patients with pheochromocytoma.  Plasma chromogranin A levels did not differ in subjects with pheochromocytoma when stratified by age, sex, tumor location, or tumor pathology.  Several drugs used in the diagnosis or treatment of pheochromocytoma (clonidine, metoprolol, phentolamine, and tyramine) had little effect on plasma chromogranin A concentration.  Within the pheochromocytoma, chromogranin A was localized along with catecholamines to the soluble core of chromaffin granules, where it accounted for 18 +/- 5% of vesicle soluble protein.  We conclude that 1) chromogranin A emerges along with catecholamines from pheochromocytoma chromaffin granules; 2) plasma chromogranin A is a sensitive and specific diagnostic tool in evaluation of actual or suspected pheochromocytoma; 3) plasma chromogranin A predicts pheochromocytoma tumor size and overall catecholamine production; and 4) drugs commonly employed in the diagnosis or treatment of pheochromocytoma have little effect on plasma chromogranin A level, preserving the usefulness of chromogranin A in evaluating pheochromocytoma.  Thus, measurement of chromogranin A provides a useful adjunct to the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma.
A simplified diagnostic approach to pheochromocytoma. A review of the literature and report of one institution's experience.  Pheochromocytoma is an unusual but potentially devastating tumor.  Although a high index of suspicion is necessary, the likelihood of a pheochromocytoma is lower in the absence of the typical symptoms and findings.  Nonetheless, screening must be broadened to include patients with a lower risk of the disease, such as those with resistant or labile hypertension who are minimally symptomatic.  Extensive diagnostic evaluations should be reserved for those whose clinical or laboratory findings are more suggestive.  Symptoms in a group of patients in whom a pheochromocytoma was seriously considered but excluded overlap symptoms in patients with a pheochromocytoma.  Certain symptoms are useful: flushing to suggest a non-pheochromocytoma illness; visual symptoms, flank pain, and pallor to suggest that a pheochromocytoma is more likely.  Combinations of symptoms can be of value: 2 or more symptoms from the triad of headache, palpitations, and diaphoresis were present in the majority of pheochromocytoma patients, but in a smaller number of non-pheochromocytoma patients.  The presence of the entire triad is more specific, but less sensitive.  New hypertension, or hypertension associated with unexplained orthostatic hypotension, are suggestive of an underlying pheochromocytoma.  Twenty-four-hour urine studies are consistently abnormal in patients with a pheochromocytoma, but are also elevated in a significant proportion of non-pheochromocytoma patients.  Values greater then 1.5-2-fold above the upper limit of normal are very suggestive that a pheochromocytoma is present, and warrant a more intensive subsequent evaluation.  Imaging studies are reliable in the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma, and can help to confirm or exclude the disease.  Patients with a higher clinical likelihood and any elevated urinary testing, or with a lower clinical likelihood and persistently and/or significantly elevated urinary testing, should have imaging studies performed.  This combination of clinical screening, 24-hour urinary testing, and imaging studies is a useful and reliable approach to patients suspected of harboring a pheochromocytoma.
Myeloma manifesting as a large jugular tumor: case report.  The authors report a case of cranial plasmacytoma with multiple myelomas and palsy of the lower cranial nerves.  The osteolytic lesion adjacent to the jugular foramen was demonstrated by an angiogram to be exceedingly hypervascular, with arteriovenous shunting resembling that seen in paragangliomas.  Forty-five cases of cranial and intracranial plasmacytoma from the literature were reviewed.  The findings indicate that a cranial plasmacytoma commonly appears to be a hypervascular tumor, whereas most dural tumors or intraparenchymal tumors have poor vascularity.
Prognostic factors in stage IB squamous cervical cancer patients with low risk for recurrence.  About one-half of cervical cancer patients whose tumors recur after radical surgery have negative lymph nodes and clear resection margins.  We evaluated 95 patients with squamous cell tumors who underwent radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy between January 1975 and December 1985 and who were thought to be at low risk for recurrence to see whether other clinical or histopathologic factors were predictive of tumor recurrence.  Detailed retrospective record review and complete pathology review were accomplished for each case.  The 5-year actuarial survival rate was 89%.  Nine patients developed recurrent disease (9.5%), of whom eight died.  Several clinical features were evaluated as possible prognostic factors: patient age (P = .26), patient race (P = .60), cervical diameter (P = .24), extent of gross cervical involvement (P = .36), and presence of contact bleeding (P = .82).  Histopathologic features were examined: depth of invasion (P = .31), number of mitoses (P = .42), character of the tumor-stromal border (P = .15), histologic differentiation (P = .02), lymph-vascular space invasion (P = .56), and width of tumor (P = .23).  Depth of invasion did correlate with increasing tumor width (P less than .001).  Once node- and margin-positive patients are excluded, differentiation may be the only feature useful in identifying patients at risk for recurrence.  Because almost one-half of our patients had poorly differentiated tumors, sole use of this feature as a criterion for adjuvant therapy would have resulted in overtreatment of low-risk patients.
Familial ovarian cancer in Israeli Jewish women.  Among 310 women with ovarian cancer of epithelial origin, eight ovarian cancer-prone families were identified, accounting for 24 cases.  Five first-degree relatives underwent prophylactic oophorectomy, and early ovarian carcinoma was diagnosed in one of them.  Familial aggregation of ovarian cancer occurs in the Israeli Jewish population.
Cone cerclage in pregnancy.  We report a technique of cone cerclage and the results and outcome in 17 patients who required a diagnostic cone biopsy in pregnancy.  The mean age of the patients was 30.6 years (range 21-41).  The mean gestational age was 18.8 weeks (range 10-32) at the time of the procedure.  There were no major complications and hemorrhage was not a significant problem.  There were no second-trimester abortions.  Two patients required beta-sympathomimetics to suppress uterine activity for longer than 24 hours after the procedure.  Six patients had invasive carcinoma, nine had cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) III, and two had CIN II.  In 14 cases, the endocervical and ectocervical margins were negative; two patients with CIN and one with multifocal microinvasion had positive margins.  Cone cerclage is a safe and easy method for performing diagnostic cervical conization during pregnancy.
Queuine, a tRNA anticodon wobble base, maintains the proliferative and pluripotent potential of HL-60 cells in the presence of the differentiating agent 6-thioguanine.  6-Thioguanine (6-TG)-induced differentiation of hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (IMP: pyrophosphate phosphoribosyltransferase, EC 2.4.2.8)-deficient HL-60 cells is characterized by 2 days of growth, after which morphological differentiation proceeds.  Addition of the tRNA wobble base queuine, in the presence of 6-TG, maintains the proliferative capability of the cells.  The ability of 6-TG to induce differentiation correlates with c-myc mRNA down-regulation, but queuine has no effect on this parameter.  Treatment with 6-TG for 2-3 days commits HL-60 cells to granulocytic differentiation, and, once committed, these cells do not respond to the monocytic inducer phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate.  Nonetheless, when cells are treated with queuine and 6-TG, they maintain the promyelocytic morphology and are capable of being induced down the monocytic pathway by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate as indicated by stabilization of c-fms mRNA and cell adherence.  In the absence of queuine, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate is incapable of inducing monocytic markers in the 6-TG-treated cells.  The data presented indicate that 6-TG-induced differentiation of HL-60 cells is a tRNA-facilitated event and that the tRNA wobble base queuine is capable of maintaining both the proliferative and pluripotent potential of the cells.
Metastatic melanoma to the facial nerve.  Isolated metastatic malignant melanoma to the facial nerve has never been reported.  This presentation illustrates a primary melanoma of the helix of the ear that was treated by excisional biopsy and then wedge resection in 1983.  The primary melanoma was Clark's level IV and 1.3 mm in thickness.  In 1985, a facial paresis slowly developed.  There was no gross evidence of recurrent melanoma in the ear or neck, but CT scan showed a mass in the region of the stylo mastoid foramen.  A reoperation of the primary site revealed metastatic melanoma in the facial nerve, expanding it to approximately 10 times its normal size.  A composite resection was done for the melanoma, and the paralyzed face was immediately rehabilitated by a masseter muscle transfer.  The patient received 6000 rads to this area postoperatively and has remained free of disease to date, having returned to his profession as a dentist.  A detailed study of all the specimens indicated that this represented a primary metastasis to the facial nerve.
An evaluation of the distinction of ectopic and pituitary ACTH dependent Cushing's syndrome by clinical features, biochemical tests and radiological findings.  The efficiency of various laboratory and radiological investigations in the differentiation of ectopic from pituitary dependent Cushing's syndrome was studied, based on findings in 23 patients with verified Cushing's disease and seven patients with the ectopic ACTH syndrome.  Clinical features strongly favouring the ectopic type were male sex and history for less than 18 months.  Basal biochemical features strongly indicating the ectopic syndrome included plasma K+ less than 3.0 mmol/l and HCO3 greater than 30 mmol/l; serum cortisol at 9 a.m.  or midnight of greater than 800 nmol/l; urine free cortisol greater than 1300 nmol/24 hours; plasma ACTH greater than 100 ng/l.  In the high-dose dexamethasone suppression test, suppression by less than 50 per cent of 9 a.m.  serum cortisol, urine free cortisol or 17-oxogenic steroids was usually indicative of an ectopic source of ACTH.  A mean suppressed value of greater than 450 nmol/l for the 9 a.m.  and midnight cortisol combined occurred in all of those with the ectopic syndrome, but in none of the 23 patients with Cushing's disease.  For urine free cortisol, a mean suppressed value of less than 1000 nmol/24 hours was found in all patients with Cushing's disease, but in none of those in the ectopic group.  In the metyrapone test, there was an increase of less than or equal to 3-fold in 11-deoxycortisol at 24 hours in patients with ectopic ACTH; the increase was greater than 3-fold in all but one of the patients with Cushing's disease.  Failure to respond to either dexamethasone or metyrapone was found in only one of the patients with Cushing's disease (Patient 16); in the ectopic group, all patients except Patient D failed to respond to either test.  It is concluded that patients presenting with clinically obvious Cushing's syndrome along with measurable plasma ACTH can be reliably divided by conventional tests into those that are driven from the pituitary and those driven by ectopic ACTH.
Genetic mechanisms of tumor suppression by the human p53 gene.  Mutations of the gene encoding p53, a 53-kilodalton cellular protein, are found frequently in human tumor cells, suggesting a crucial role for this gene in human oncogenesis.  To model the stepwise mutation or loss of both p53 alleles during tumorigenesis, a human osteosarcoma cell line, Saos-2, was used that completely lacked endogenous p53.  Single copies of exogenous p53 genes were then introduced by infecting cells with recombinant retroviruses containing either point-mutated or wild-type versions of the p53 cDNA sequence.  Expression of wild-type p53 suppressed the neoplastic phenotype of Saos-2 cells, whereas expression of mutated p53 conferred a limited growth advantage to cells in the absence of wild-type p53.  Wild-type p53 was phenotypically dominant to mutated p53 in a two-allele configuration.  These results suggest that, as with the retinoblastoma gene, mutation of both alleles of the p53 gene is essential for its role in oncogenesis.
Reoperation for colorectal carcinoma.  In the management of the patient with intra-abdominal recurrence of colorectal carcinoma, surgery remains the primary mode of therapy when cure or significant palliation is anticipated.  Appreciation of the importance of close follow-up after primary resection coupled with improved diagnostic modalities has allowed the surgeon not only to detect earlier recurrence but also to select the patients most likely to benefit from resection of recurrent disease.  Improved surgical techniques with resultant decreases in the rates of morbidity and mortality have allowed safe hepatic resection of metastatic disease.  In selected patients, this procedure produces 5-year survival rates approaching 50%.  Although a clear consensus has not been reached, most studies agree that positive prognostic indicators include absence of extrahepatic disease, a small number of intrahepatic lesions, a low CEA level, and a better Dukes stage of the primary.  Likewise, in the patient with recurrent disease locally, surgery provides the only means of cure and also plays a significant role in palliation.  Aggressive resection with generous surgical margins in patients with contained disease may yield 5-year survival rates approaching 35%.  In patients with unresectable disease and even in those with carcinomatosis, palliation can be obtained by surgical therapy.  Judgment is necessary in treating these patients both preoperatively and intraoperatively.  Surgical intervention for obstruction, perforation, or other anatomic or physiological compromise is often indicated and can improve the quality of life of the patient with intra-abdominal recurrence.
The Merkel cell and associated neoplasms in the eyelids and periocular region.  Merkel cells are clear oval cells in the epidermis and outer root sheaths of hair follicles, which are probably of epithelial origin, share ultrastructural features with neuroendocrine cells, and are found in association with touch receptors.  In the eyelid, they occur singly in the epidermis and external root sheaths of hairs and eyelashes, and in specialized touch spots alternating with eyelashes.  Their typical electron microscopical and antigenic features include dense-core granules, intranuclear rodlets, spinous processes, and a positive reaction for specific cytokeratins, epithelial membrane antigen, neuron-specific enolase, chromogranin and synaptophysin.  Merkel cell carcinoma probably develops from precursor cells which give rise to keratinocytes and Merkel cells, and nearly one out of ten Merkel cell carcinomas occur in the eyelid and periocular region.  They tend to be bulging lesions near the lid margin of elderly patients, reddish in color, and erythematous with telangiectatic vessels.  The diagnosis is based on the frequent presence of neurofilaments and paranuclear aggregates of intermediate filaments in addition to features typical of normal Merkel cells.  The tumor often mimics lymphoma or undifferentiated carcinoma and frequently invades lymphatic vessels.  One third of Merkel cell carcinomas recur, almost two thirds give rise to regional node metastases, and up to one half metastasize widely and result in death.  Initial treatment should be prompt and aggressive, with wide resection and routine postoperative irradiation.  Although metastatic lesions often respond to radiation therapy and cytostatic drugs, these treatments are mainly of palliative value.
Surgical strategy for early gastric cancer.  The diagnostic and therapeutic options in early gastric cancer are reviewed.  In Japan, the rate of detection of early gastric cancers has increased so that minute gastric cancers can now be identified as a result of advances in diagnostic methods.  The results of histopathological staging of a large number of resected specimens have led to three surgical options based on size and depth of the primary lesion, namely classical R2 resection, radical resection with limited lymphadenectomy and endoscopic surgery.
Adjuvant chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil, vincristine and CCNU for patients with Dukes' C colorectal cancer. The Swedish Gastrointestinal Tumour Adjuvant Therapy Group.  A prospective controlled randomized trial testing adjuvant postoperative combination chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil, lomustine (CCNU) and vincristine) versus no adjuvant therapy in patients operated on for Dukes' C colorectal cancer is reported.  In total 334 patients aged less than 70 years were recruited: 205 patients with colonic and 99 with rectal cancer, but there were three protocol violations and these cases are excluded from further consideration.  Twenty-seven patients had a limited resection of their cancer.  After 5 years' follow-up there was no significant difference in the tumour-free survival rate or in the survival rate between the treated and control groups.  Twenty-nine of the 147 patients who started chemotherapy discontinued this treatment because of side-effects, mainly from the gastrointestinal tract.  In 30 patients treatment was discontinued because of recurrent disease.  The conclusion is that systemic administration of combination chemotherapy for colorectal cancer after operation is not worthwhile in routine clinical practice.
Value of retesting subjects with a positive Hemoccult in screening for colorectal cancer.  Within a prospective randomized screening study for early detection of colorectal cancer with rehydrated Hemoccult II test, the possibility of increasing the specificity of the test by retesting patients with an initially positive Hemoccult II test was investigated.  Of those offered the test 3561 (62.6 per cent) returned it and it was positive in 210 cases (5.9 per cent).  The repeat test was performed by 184 patients and was positive in 68 (1.9 per cent).  All those with a positive initial test had rectosigmoidoscopy to 60 cm and a double contrast enema.  A carcinoma was found in one in seven patients with a positive retest but in only one in 100 patients with a negative retest (P less than 0.001).  The specificity of the test was, therefore, increased from 95 per cent to 98 per cent and the sensitivity was unchanged.  Rescreening was offered at a later date and increased numbers were available: 7147 patients returned the test and 369 (5.2 per cent) were positive.  The test was repeated in 360 patients and 118 (1.7 per cent) were positive.  A colorectal neoplasm was found in one in three of those with a positive repeat test, compared with one in seven of those with a negative repeat test.  In conclusion, screening for early detection of colorectal cancer with a rehydrated Hemoccult II test may be followed by investigation of only those patients with a positive retest.  Such a procedure will reduce the work-load by 60 per cent without reducing sensitivity.
Epidermal growth factor receptor expression in colorectal cancer.  Epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor expression was estimated in 50 invasive human colorectal cancers using immunohistochemistry and the degree of expression was quantified from integrated optical density measurements on the stained sections.  All tumours stained positively, but Dukes' C tumours exhibited significantly higher levels of receptor than either Dukes' A or B tumours.  In addition, histologically high grade cancers expressed receptors more strongly than those of low grade.  It is concluded that a high EGF receptor concentration is associated with poor prognostic factors in colorectal malignancy.
Levamisole and 5-fluorouracil therapy for resected colon cancer: a new indication.  OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the benefits and risks of postoperative treatment with levamisole plus 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in patients with colon cancer.  DESIGN: Computerized searches of MEDLINE and CANCERLIT were performed, and the reference list of each retrieved article was checked.  Only randomized trials of therapy with levamisole alone or combined with 5-FU for colon cancer without distant metastases were included.  The studies were then evaluated with the use of four criteria.  RESULTS: We reviewed six randomized trials, of which three satisfied our criteria.  Two studies demonstrated a significant improvement in the survival rate with levamisole plus 5-FU among patients with colon cancer and pathologically confirmed metastases to adjacent lymph nodes (Dukes' stage C).  A subgroup analysis in another study demonstrated a similar benefit.  The toxic effects of the drugs were generally mild.  The three other studies showed no difference in survival rates between the treatment groups; however, the samples were too small to detect a clinically or statistically important difference.  CONCLUSIONS: Because many patients with colon cancer will suffer a relapse we recommend that they be offered the opportunity to participate in clinical trials of adjuvant therapy.  For those with stage C disease not entering a clinical trial levamisole plus 5-FU is appropriate adjuvant therapy.
Retinoid modulation of insulin-like growth factor-binding proteins and inhibition of breast carcinoma proliferation.  Retinoids induce cellular differentiation and inhibit cellular proliferation.  Proliferation of human breast carcinoma cells in vitro is markedly inhibited by these compounds.  On the other hand, insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) and their receptors seem to be involved in the growth of certain breast carcinoma cells by autocrine or paracrine effects.  Since the effects of both IGF-I and IGF-II may be modulated by specific binding proteins (IGF-BPs) we examined the possibility that one mechanism by which retinoic acid may inhibit cancer growth is by an alteration in these BPs, thereby blocking IGF's growth effect.  Retinoic acid (RA; 1 microM) completely blocked the effect of IGF-I (50 ng/ml) on enhancing proliferation of MCF-7 cells in culture.  This effect of RA was not associated with any significant change in specific IGF-I-binding sites on these cells.  RA induced a 3-fold increase in IGF-binding activity in conditioned medium, measured using a polyethylene glycol-immunoglobulin precipitation assay and a charcoal absorption assay.  This increase was associated with the appearance of 42- and 46-kDa IGF-BPs on ligand blotting.  The effect of RA on these IGF-BPs was time and concentration dependent.  In contrast, during some experiments the 27- and 36-kDa BPs actually decreased.  These findings support the hypothesis that RA may inhibit the growth of certain breast carcinoma cells by increasing the secretion of certain IGF-BPs, which could directly modulate the growth effect of IGFs.
Evaluation of the serum level of immunosuppressive substance in oral cancer patients.  The serum level of immunosuppressive substance (IS) was studied in 40 patients with primary oral cancer and in 79 patients without cancer.  Its usefulness was evaluated as a parameter for monitoring therapy as well as recurrence of the tumors.  Mean values for serum IS in patients with cancer and patients without were 687 +/- 284 micrograms/mL and 464 +/- 153 micrograms/mL, respectively.  Normal healthy controls had a mean value of 431 +/- 105 micrograms/mL, with the cutoff value set at 641 micrograms/mL (mean +2 SD).  Patients without cancer who had a severe infectious disease showed conspicuously high serum IS levels, and these values were closely correlated with their C-reactive protein values.  The positive rate of IS increased in all patients with oral cancer was 58%.  The mean level of serum IS in cancer patients was significantly higher than that of the controls (P less than .01), and the level was found to be more elevated as the stage of the disease advanced (stage I to III, 48%; stage IV, 68%).  Histologic analysis of the tumor cells in patients with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) showed that the mean serum IS level of those who had poorly differentiated SCC was much higher (937 +/- 181 micrograms/mL) than that of patients with well-differentiated SCC (616 +/- 159 micrograms/mL).  Patients who had recurrent or metastatic cancer, or those who died from the cancer exhibited marked elevation of the serum IS levels, whereas patients who remained free of cancer in the follow-up period showed significantly lower serum IS levels.  The rise and fall of the serum IS level was closely correlated with the disease progression and/or remission.  These data strongly suggest that serum IS is a useful parameter for monitoring the disease stage as well as the effect of therapy on patients with oral cancer.
Literacy and laryngectomy: how should one treat head and neck cancer in patients who cannot read or write?  The entire population of otolaryngologists and radiation oncologists (N = 192) in active practice in the state of North Carolina were surveyed to assess their level of awareness of illiteracy among adults in the United States and to determine whether these physicians consider illiteracy in the treatment decision process for patients with head and neck cancer.  Excluding respondents who did not treat patients with head and neck cancer and physicians practicing outside of the state of North Carolina, the response rate was 115 of 182, or 63%.  Only 26% of respondents were able to estimate correctly the prevalence of illiteracy in the US adult population.  Forty-one percent of respondents, however, stated that they did consider their patient's ability to read and/or write before making treatment recommendations for head and neck cancer.  This survey and accompanying literature review suggest that physicians perceive illiteracy as a problem that may have a significant impact on patients with head and neck cancer, but lack the data needed to enable them to quantify the effect of illiteracy on treatment outcome.  The study reported is the first step in examining ways in which illiteracy might negatively affect patient outcomes.
Paratesticular myxoma: an unusual benign intrascrotal neoplasm.  We have presented a case of paratesticular myxoma and have described the clinical history, findings on light microscopy and immunohistochemistry, and possible pathogenesis.  Although primary paratesticular myxoma is a rare lesion, it should be considered in the differential diagnosis of intrascrotal mesenchymal tumors.
Astroblastoma: electron microscopy and immunohistochemical findings: case report.  The clinical, histological, immunohistochemical, and electron microscopic features of a cerebral astroblastoma are reported.  The patient is a young woman with a superficial parietal tumor.  Macroscopic findings include a well-delineated superficial nodule with a hard central core.  Histological study disclosed a predominantly papillary tumor with hyalinized vessels.  Tumor cells were scarcely positive with immunohistochemical stain for glial fibrillary acidic protein, extensive and diffusely positive with vimentin and neuron-specific enolase, and intensely positive with S-100 and epithelial membrane antigen in the papillary areas.  Ultrastructural study showed abundant intermediate filaments forming bundles in tumoral cytoplasms, membrane junctions, and external laminae when cells were in contact with collagen fibers.  Based on immunohistochemical and ultrastructural characteristics, we believe that the filaments seen in tumor cells are mainly vimentin filaments.  These peculiar immunohistochemical patterns in a glioma may aid in the histological diagnosis of this rare tumor type.
Intramedullary spinal cord germinoma: case report.  A case of intramedullary spinal cord germinoma within the conus medullaris, with lumbago and pain in the lower extremities, is presented.  The intramedullary spinal cord germinoma was determined by a biopsy specimen.  After local irradiation of 50 Gy, the tumor markedly decreased in size and clinical symptoms disappeared.
Ganglioneuroma of the spinal cord.  This report describes a 2-year-old boy who harbored an intramedullary ganglioneuroma involving almost the entire length of the spinal cord.  The terminology, pathology, and neurobiological behavior of this tumor is discussed.
Mammography and early breast cancer detection.  Screening mammography has been shown to reduce breast cancer mortality.  Both film-screen mammography and xeromammography are highly sensitive and specific.  Mammography accreditation programs assure physicians and patients that a facility provides mammography of the highest quality, using the lowest possible radiation dose.  Mammographic signs of early cancer include a small mass, calcifications, architectural distortion and a neodensity.  Dense tissue may result in a false-negative examination even when a cancer is palpable, with adverse effects if biopsy is delayed.
Carcinoma of the ductus choledochus.  A retrospective review of patients treated for carcinoma of the common bile duct has demonstrated improvement in diagnostic capabilities, leading to earlier management by resectional therapy.  The ability to resect these tumors is directly translatable to improved long-term survival.  Efforts to obtain proof of malignancy prior to resection are often frustrated by the inability to obtain adequate representative tissue for frozen section.  Choledochoscopic biopsies and incisional biopsies have given the highest yield of positive diagnoses.  In experienced hands, a program of fewer preoperative tests with emphasis on early operation, diagnosis, and definitive treatment may be more cost-effective in the management of patients with common bile duct cancer.
The effects of midazolam on cerebral blood flow and oxygen consumption. Interaction with nitrous oxide in patients undergoing craniotomy for supratentorial cerebral tumours.  Cerebral blood flow and the cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen were measured in 30 patients during craniotomy for supratentorial cerebral tumours by a modification of the Kety-Schmidt technique using Xenon 133 intravenously.  Anaesthesia was induced with midazolam 0.3 mg/kg, fentanyl and pancuronium, and maintained with midazolam as a continuous infusion, fentanyl, pancuronium and nitrous oxide in oxygen or oxygen in air.  The concentration of midazolam in the blood of 10 patients was about 300 ng/litre during two measurements; the patients' lungs were ventilated with N2O in oxygen.  The concentration of midazolam in the blood of another 10 patients was doubled to about 600 ng/litre during the second flow measurement; the patients' lungs were ventilated with N2O/O2.  The concentration of midazolam in the blood of the third group of 10 patients was doubled to 600 ng/litre during the second flow measurement; the patients' lungs were ventilated with oxygen in air.  No relationship was found between the dose of midazolam and cerebral blood flow or oxygen consumption.  Nitrous oxide in combination with midazolam also had no effect on these variables.
Capillary hemangiomas and treatment with the flash lamp-pumped pulsed dye laser   Strawberry, or capillary, hemangiomas are common vascular neoplasms, with an incidence of approximately 2.6% in neonates.  They usually develop in the first few weeks of life, so that between 1 month and 1 year the incidence rises to between 8.7% and 10.1%.  These lesions may grow quite large in the first year of life, and they may ulcerate or obstruct a vital organ or function.  The great majority will spontaneously regress after the first year of life.  Parents are often alarmed at the sight of these hemangiomas and need reassurance that the great majority will regress spontaneously.  Treatments such as cryosurgery, irradiation, radium instillation, corticosteroid therapy, or surgical excision are often ineffective or cause significant morbidity.  We describe 10 children with capillary hemangiomas treated with the flash lamp-pumped pulsed dye laser.  The patients ranged in age from 7 weeks to 5.5 years at the beginning of laser therapy.  The patients underwent 3.1 +/- 1 (mean +/- SD) laser treatments, with a mean regression of the lesions of 69.9% +/- 4.5%.  All patients demonstrated some diminution in the size and color of their hemangiomas after the treatments, and there were no ill effects, such as ulceration, hemorrhage, infection, or scarring.  There was no evidence of hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation.  Pulsed dye laser therapy should be considered as an option in the treatment of capillary hemangiomas, preferably prior to their full evolution.  It is also a useful therapeutic approach in those hemangiomas that are slow to regress in older children.
Effectiveness of radiotherapy with radical neck dissection in cancers of the head and neck.  A retrospective analysis of 457 radical neck dissections performed over a 30-year period for cancers of the oral cavity, pharynx, and larynx was carried out.  Two hundred thirteen patients underwent radiotherapy to the primary cancer site and/or to the neck.  Of these, 164 underwent perioperative adjuvant radiotherapy and 24 underwent definitive radiation for cure and were followed up by salvage surgery.  Thus, 188 patients received radiotherapy for nonrecurrent disease.  Twenty-five additional patients underwent radiation for surgical failure following radical neck dissection.  The goal of the study was to determine whether radiotherapy altered the course or end result of the disease.  The T and N stage at onset of disease was similar for the radiotherapy and nonradiotherapy groups.  Preoperative radiotherapy was effective in down staging the disease at the primary site and, to a lesser extent, in the lymph nodes, but had limited impact on survival.  Failure to control the disease in the neck occurred in 60 (32%) of the 188 patients who received radiotherapy for primary disease; recurrence rates were lower in the combined therapy group than in the surgical group of patients with N2 and N3 stages of disease.  The 3-year disease-free survival was 45%; this was no better than the 63% survival rate in patients who did not receive radiotherapy, although survival was better in the combined therapy group for patients with N3 stage of disease.  The worst results were in those patients who were irradiated for surgical failure (14% survival); the 24 patients who required salvage radical neck dissection following failure of definitive radiotherapy for cure had a 42% survival.
Juvenile (embryonal and alveolar) rhabdomyosarcoma of the head and neck in adults. A clinical, pathologic, and immunohistochemical study of 12 cases.  Sites in the head and neck region (orbit, nasopharynx, nasal cavity, etc.) are among the most frequent locations for juvenile (embryonal and alveolar) rhabdomyosarcomas in patients younger than 15 years; however, comparable neoplasms in adults are very uncommon.  A clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical study of 12 juvenile rhabdomyosarcomas in patients between the ages of 18 and 36 years is presented.  There was a female:male ratio of 2:1.  The orbit with or without contiguous paranasal sinus involvement, nasal cavity, sphenoid sinus, middle ear, and soft tissues of the neck and preauricular region were the primary sites.  Seven tumors involved a parameningeal site and eight cases were alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas which together contributed to the adverse outcome.  Only two patients were long-term, disease-free survivors.  Six patients have died of tumor and two others are alive with persistent disease.  Immunohistochemical study in 11 cases demonstrated reactivity for vimentin and muscle-specific actin (HHF-35) and desmin in ten cases.  Juvenile rhabdomyosarcoma rarely presents in the head and neck of adults but should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a small cell neoplasm in patients during the third and fourth decades of life.
A comparative analysis of three different techniques for the detection of breast cancer cells in bone marrow.  Three different methods, morphologic, immunocytochemic, and fluorescence activated cell sorter (FC) analysis, were compared with respect to their efficiency in detecting breast cancer cells in bone marrow.  In the first series of experiments, the three techniques were compared using bone marrow cells artificially mixed with a known amount of breast cancer cells, whereas in a second series bone marrow from breast cancer patients with bone metastases were used.  The following results were obtained: When mixtures of the first series were analyzed, FC analysis detected from 1% to 10% of breast cancer cells in bone marrow (0.2% was a border line value), the morphologic method detected from 0.05% to 10%, and the immunocytochemic method, which was clearly superior, detected breast cancer cells in all mixtures (from 0.00025% to 10%).  It was noted that, with both the morphologic and immunocytochemic methods, the percentage of breast cancer cells detected was 2 to 360 times higher than the percentage of added cells, and enrichment was inversely proportional to the percentage of added cells.  This result could be a result of different separation of cells during centrifugation due to the different density of breast cancer cells.  The superiority of the immunocytochemic method was confirmed in the second series of experiments.
Microinvasive carcinoma of the uterine cervix (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics Stage IA).  In 1985 the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) subdivided Stage IA cervical cancer and specified metric criteria to demarcate Stage IA from Stage IB.  Early stromal invasion (Stage IA1) denotes the first invasive protrusions of a carcinoma in situ into the stroma.  Microcarcinomas (Stage IA2) are small cancers a number of orders of magnitude larger than Stage IA1 lesions and with a maximum depth of invasion of 5 mm and a maximum horizontal spread of 7 mm; larger lesions are classified as Stage IB.  This study reviews 486 patients previously classified as having Stage IA disease.  This yielded 344 Stage IA1 and 101 Stage IA2 lesions; 41 cancers were reclassified as Stage IB.  Three hundred nine, 89, and 38 patients were followed for greater than or equal to 5 years.  One (0.3%) patient with Stage IA1 disease re-presented with Stage IIB disease 12 years after conization.  Five (5.6%) patients with Stage IA2 lesions developed invasive recurrences; three died.  None of the 38 patients reclassified as having a Stage IB lesion, including 16 who were treated conservatively, developed a recurrence.  The FIGO classification is not a guideline for treatment.  Stage IA1 lesions can be treated conservatively, but treatment in Stage IA2 must be individualized.  Risk factors such as vascular space involvement and confluency are of high sensitivity but low specificity.
Leiomyosarcoma of bone. A clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural study of five cases.  The authors identified five leiomyosarcomas (LMS) in a review of 13 nonmatrix-producing spindle cell sarcomas of bone.  Only two were initially recognized as LMS; the others had been diagnosed as malignant fibrous histiocytoma (two) and fibrosarcoma (one).  The patients, four of whom were women, ranged in age from 32 to 70 years.  Sites included proximal humerus (two), distal femur (two), and rib (one).  All tumors presented with clinical and radiographic features consistent with a diagnosis of primary bone neoplasms, although one probably represented a solitary metastasis from a primary uterine LMS.  Radiographs showed lytic bone destruction with a moth-eaten appearance, and three cases had soft tissue extension.  Histologically, all tumors showed broad, interlacing fascicles of spindle cells with pleomorphic nuclei, frequent mitoses, and necrosis.  Two cases had a focal storiform pattern and bizarre multinucleated cells, and two other cases had focally prominent osteoclast-like giant cells.  Extensive immunoreactivity for muscle actin was seen in all cases and for desmin in three.  In each case, electron microscopy showed definite smooth muscle differentiation including cytoplasmic filaments with densities.  At this writing, two patients are free of disease (including the patient with a presumed metastasis), one is alive with locally recurrent disease, and two are dead of disease.  Experience suggests that LMS of bone is a distinct clinicopathologic entity that may be more common than previously recognized.  Application of immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy to nonmatrix-producing bone sarcomas should facilitate diagnosis of additional cases.
Clinical characteristics and treatment outcome of children with acute lymphocytic leukemia and Down's syndrome. A Pediatric Oncology Group study.  Of 2947 children with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), treated during three consecutive studies of the Pediatric Oncology Group (1974-1986), 52 (1.8%) had Down's Syndrome (DS).  Comparison of clinical and laboratory characteristics showed no significant differences in leukocyte count, racial distribution, sex ratio, platelet count, incidence of mediastinal mass, lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly, or percentage of blood or bone marrow blasts for children with ALL with or without Down's Syndrome (DS-ALL or NDS-ALL, respectively).  However, children with DS-ALL were slightly older at the time of presentation and had higher hemoglobin values.  The relative frequency of each major immunophenotype (early pre-B, pre-B, T, or B) was also comparable for patients with or without DS.  For this report, treatment regimens were categorized as either conventional (no consolidation therapy) or intensive.  Cox regression analysis revealed that the presence of DS, a higher leukocyte count, black race, or age older than 10 years was independently associated with a poorer event-free survival (EFS) for children treated with conventional chemotherapy.  However, for the cohort of children who received intensive chemotherapy, DS was no longer an independent risk factor.  In fact, event-free survival (EFS) was markedly improved to a level comparable with that observed in the children diagnosed as having NDS-ALL.  On the other hand, serious toxicity, requiring interruption of treatment, was significantly more frequent in the intensively treated children with DS compared with similarly treated patients with NDS-ALL, although deaths resulting from toxicity occurred infrequently.
Psychosocial adjustment in women with breast cancer.  There is a plethora of studies investigating psychosocial adjustment in women with breast cancer, its correlates, clinical course, and prognosis.  These studies have been conducted with varying degrees of methodologic rigor.  An assessment has been made of the quality of this existing evidence to identify from the best evidence the factors which predict the adjustment status of women with breast cancer.  Studies have been reviewed, using methodologic standards for the critical appraisal of studies on prognosis, developed by Sackett and colleagues in the Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics at McMaster University (Hamilton, Ontario, Canada).  Few of the studies investigating psychosocial adjustment of women with breast cancer meet all of the criteria for reviewing studies of clinical course and prognosis.  This review focuses the direction and methodologic rigor required in future investigations.  In particular, studies are needed that employ prospective designs and that deliberately measure or control for the extraneous prognostic variables that may affect adjustment.  Future investigations need to incorporate adequate precision in measurement so that measures of the psychosocial variables are objective, reliable, and valid.
Prognosis of pregnancy-associated breast cancer.  The survival of patients with pregnancy-associated (PA) breast cancer is difficult to predict for two reasons: The combination is very rare, and the natural history of breast cancer that is not associated with pregnancy is intricate and varies among individuals.  Valid data collection and analysis is problematic given that studies gather patients over many years.  The charts of 56 women with Stages I, II, and III breast cancer, who were pregnant or within 1 year postpartum at the time of breast cancer diagnosis between 1960 and 1980, were analyzed.  Patients with PA breast cancer were compared to nonpregnant women of comparable ages, who were treated at the same hospital, by the same physicians, and during the same period.  Four patients were lost before 5-year follow-up, and one patient before 10-year follow-up.  These five patients had distant metastases at the time they were lost to follow-up, and are considered to have died within that time.  Across stages, patients with PA breast cancer have survival not significantly different from those patients with non-pregnancy-associated (non-PA) breast cancer.
Combination hormonal therapy with tamoxifen plus fluoxymesterone versus tamoxifen alone in postmenopausal women with metastatic breast cancer. An updated analysis.  A randomized trial was performed to determine if therapy with tamoxifen (TAM) plus fluoxymesterone (FLU) was more efficacious than TAM alone for postmenopausal women with metastatic breast cancer.  Patients failing TAM could subsequently receive FLU.  The dose of both drugs was 10 mg orally twice daily.  Objective responses were seen in 50 of 119 (42%) TAM patients and 64 of 119 (54%) TAM plus FLU patients (two-sided P = 0.07).  Time to disease progression was better for TAM plus FLU (medians: 11.6 versus 6.5 months; Cox model, P = 0.03).  Duration of response and survival were similar in the two treatment arms.  Among 97 patients with estrogen receptor (ER) of 10 or greater and 65 years of age or older, there were highly significant advantages for treatment with TAM plus FLU in both response rate and time to progression.  Of particular note is that in this patient group TAM plus FLU showed a survival advantage (Cox model, P = 0.05).  Although these data require confirmation in a prospective randomized trial, they suggest that there is a substantive therapeutic advantage for TAM plus FLU over TAM alone in elderly women with ER of 10 fmol or greater.
Sphincter preservation in rectal cancer by local excision and postoperative radiation therapy.  The authors report the preliminary results of 14 patients with localized, mobile, resectable rectal cancer treated with local excision and postoperative radiation therapy (RT).  All had negative surgical resection margins and two received 5-fluorouracil (5-FU).  The median follow-up was 29 months (4-43 months).  The 3-year actuarial survival was 88%.  The incidence of local failure was 7% (only site of failure) and 21% (component of failure).  The incidence of local failure increased with T stage (T1, 0/3 [0%]; T2, 1/7 [14%]; and T3, 2/4 [50%]) and tumor size (greater than 3 cm, 33%, versus less than or equal to 3 cm, 0%).  Three patients developed local failure at 6, 15, and 21 months.  Three underwent a salvage abdominoperineal resection and were locally controlled at 2 and 28 months following salvage surgery.  One patient underwent an abdominoperineal resection for a clinically presumed local failure; however, no tumor was found in the specimen.  Therefore, the 13 patients who either were initially locally controlled or underwent salvage or nonsalvage surgery had no evidence of disease in the pelvis at the time of last follow-up.  Local excision and postoperative RT may be an alternative to standard surgery in selected cases.  However, additional follow-up and more experience are needed in order to determine if this approach will ultimately have local control and survival rates similar to those of a low anterior resection or an abdominoperineal resection.
Flow cytometric DNA analysis of hepatocellular carcinoma.  The prognostic value of nuclear DNA content was studied retrospectively using flow cytometry in 203 cases of resected hepatocellular carcinoma.  The occurrence of DNA aneuploidy, which was detected in 50% of patients, correlated significantly with tumor size and the presence of vascular invasion or intrahepatic metastasis.  Overall, patients with DNA aneuploid tumors had a significantly worse prognosis than those with DNA diploid tumors (P less than 0.001) and, also in subdivided groups by tumor size (P less than 0.01).  Among DNA aneuploid patients, the survival times were significantly shorter for patients with a low DNA index (less than 1.5) than for those with a high DNA index (greater than or equal to 1.5) (P less than 0.05).  In a Cox multivariate analysis, nuclear DNA content provided significant prognostic value (P = 0.008), as did vascular invasion (P = 0.001) and intrahepatic metastasis (P = 0.005).  These results indicated that nuclear DNA content has an important prognostic value in hepatocellular carcinoma.
Predictors of physician nonadherence to chemotherapy regimens.  Physician nonadherence to cancer treatment regimens may diminish treatment efficacy and compromise clinical research.  The influence of clinical, demographic, and psychosocial patient characteristics on physician adherence to breast cancer chemotherapy was investigated, as was the role of the clinician's attitudes concerning the chemotherapy.  One hundred seven women recently diagnosed with breast cancer were followed for 26 weeks of treatment.  Fifty-six (52%) of the patients experienced unjustified modification for at least one chemotherapeutic agent.  Stepwise multiple regression revealed independent contributions of increased patient age, treatment setting (clinic versus academic or community private practice), and stage of disease to physician nonadherence.  Regimen complexity, delay in seeking treatment, and presence of psychiatric disorder did not contribute, in general, to unjustified regimen modifications.  Patient psychological and psychiatric factors, however, did influence prescribing behavior for vincristine.  Physician awareness of factors contributing to unnecessary treatment modifications may reduce the frequency of such behaviors.
Complete remission in refractory anaplastic adult Wilms' tumor treated with cisplatin and etoposide.  A 61-year-old woman underwent a left radical nephrectomy for Stage II anaplastic Wilm's tumor.  She received no adjuvant therapy.  One year later computerized tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed a mass in the left renal fossa and retroperitoneal adenopathy.  A CT-guided needle biopsy was nondiagnostic.  The patient had progressive disease after treatment with dactinomycin, doxorubicin, and vincristine, but achieved a complete response after treatment with cisplatin and etoposide.  The therapy of Wilms' tumor in adults is discussed.
Expression of class I and II human leukocyte antigens by thyrocytes and lymphocytic infiltration on human thyroid tumors. An immunofluorescence study.  Surgical thyroid sections from 30 papillary carcinomas (PC), six medullary carcinomas (MC), three anaplastic carcinomas (AC), two follicular carcinomas (FC), and 16 adenomas (AD) were examined with an indirect immunofluorescence technique employing different monoclonal antibodies to evaluate the expression of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A, B, C (Class I) and DR, DP, DQ (Class II) by thyrocytes, together with the phenotype and distribution of inflammatory cells.  Ten PC and four FC were also investigated for the presence of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1).  In situ deposits of immunocomplexes and circulating thyroid autoantibodies were also evaluated.  An increased expression of Class I antigens was found in all PC and FC, in 33% of MC and AC, and in 31% of AD.  An anomalous expression of Class II antigens was observed in 70% of PC, in 50% of FC, in 33% of AC, in 19% of AD, and in none of the MC.  Expression of DP or DQ was revealed only in a portion of the DR-positive glands.  A reduction of microsomal autoantigen expression was found.  No ICAM-1-positive thyrocytes were detected.  A moderate T-lymphocytic infiltrate was noticed only in PC, where it was correlated with DR and DP and/or DQ coexpression.  B-cells and natural killer cells were virtually absent.  The authors speculate that the weak Class II antigens expression, together with the partial or complete loss in microsomal autoantigen and the absence of ICAM-1 by thyrocytes, may account for the limited engagement of immunocompetent cells observed in thyroid tumors.
Advances in medical imaging for cancer diagnosis and treatment.  Over the last several decades, significant "new eyes" have been developed that improve the diagnosis, treatment, planning, and monitoring of human cancer: computer tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and spectroscopy (MRS), single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and positron emission tomography (PET).  Innovative advances in both morphologic and functional imaging have led to a dramatic improvement in our ability to diagnose and monitor human cancer.  Frequently, anatomic detail can be demonstrated in ways that exceed views at surgery, and functional biochemical imaging is being used to show the metabolic activity and receptor status of normal and pathologic states.  In vivo functional and biochemical studies differentiate normal from neoplastic or nonviable tissue, and make it possible to measure progression or regression of the disease.  Because physiologic changes often precede morphologic findings in many disease processes, the use of in vivo biochemical probes can demonstrate disease before anatomic abnormalities become evident.  Gross changes in anatomy are no longer adequate endpoints for therapy protocols.  Today, using physiologic imaging, we can evaluate the response to treatment within hours of administration of therapy.  Adjuvant metabolic tumor imaging studies provide complimentary information to morphologic evaluation of human cancers that will ultimately lead to better patient care.
The natural history of colorectal cancer. Opportunities for intervention.  There is now a better understanding of the natural history of colorectal cancer, which has provided a basis for intervention to influence outcome.  The possible interventions include earlier detection of colorectal cancer, removal of premalignant adenomas, demonstration of the mucosal field defect that precedes neoplasia to evaluate baseline risk and its change with dietary modification, and identification of inherited and dietary risk factors.  Five controlled trials evaluating early detection of colorectal cancer with fecal occult blood testing have enrolled more than 309,000 patients.  Early stage cancers with improved survival has been observed, but data on mortality reduction have not as yet been reported.  Studies of patients with adenomas have demonstrated high synchronous and metachronous rates as a basis for complete colon evaluation initially and a surveillance follow-up program.  Hyperproliferation and lack of normal differentiation have been observed as a field defect in the colon preceding neoplasia.  Inherited factors have recently been shown to be important in a larger proportion of individuals destined to develop colorectal adenomas and cancer.  These observations of the natural history of colorectal cancer have provided new opportunities for the application of radiologic and endoscopic techniques in diagnosis and surveillance; each examination has its merit.  Further research is needed to answer many critical questions that have been raised regarding the impact of these interventions.
Imaging techniques in the diagnosis of carcinoma of the colon.  The variability in the published results for colonoscopy and barium enema examinations is confusing.  With both, optimum results are dependent on meticulous preparation, technical excellence, and operator proficiency.  It is a mistake to place colonoscopy and the barium enema in competitive positions; the two methods ideally complement one another in the evaluation of high risk individuals, including those with positive Hemoccult tests.  The exclusion of significant pathology by the double-contrast enema can be relied on and is less costly to the patient.  Detection of abnormalities by a barium enema should, when necessary, be followed by colonoscopic verification and/or biopsy.  When used in this sequence, the procedures provide a cost-effective approach to the early detection and control of cancer; it is estimated that observance of the ACS guidelines can reduce mortality rates by 30%.
Imaging bone tumors in the 1990s.  Progress in bone tumor management has occurred as a result of cooperation among surgeons, oncologists, pathologists, and radiologists.  During the 1990s radiologists will contribute to care of patients with bone tumors in major ways.  Tumor detection and preliminary diagnosis will be accomplished by radiography.  Tumor local extent will be assessed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and to a lesser degree by computed tomography (CT).  Distant spread of malignancy will be documented by radionuclide scintigraphy (skeleton) and by CT (lungs).  The combined estimate of local extent and distant spread will assure adequate staging before definitive management decisions.  Preoperative closed percutaneous biopsy for histologic diagnosis will be accomplished on an outpatient basis under fluoroscopic or CT guidance.  Arteriography will be employed for delivery of local chemotherapy.  Some combination of arteriography, MRI, and MR spectroscopy will be used to evaluate tumor response.  After limb-salvage surgery, MRI will sequentially assess the tumor bed; bone scintigraphy and CT will detect skeletal and pulmonary metastases.  The radiologist's role will undergo continuous redefinition.
Primary neoplasms of the hollow organs of the gastrointestinal tract. Staging and follow-up.  The number of imaging modalities available to stage and follow-up patients with primary neoplasms of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract continues to increase.  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), and ultrasonography are useful techniques for both staging and follow-up.  For staging, CT is most frequently used for the detection of liver metastases and is increasingly used as a substitute for the chest radiograph in the detection of lung metastases.  CT is still the imaging test of choice for the preoperative staging of esophageal carcinoma.  CT is less helpful in staging the patient with gastric carcinoma or colorectal carcinoma.  The current usefulness of MRI in the staging of GI tract malignancies is limited by the lack of an adequate oral intraluminal contrast agent and degradation of images due to motion.  Sonography, especially the new technique of endoscopic ultrasound, is promising for the detection of local invasion from GI tract malignancies.  CT is used in the follow-up of patients with tumors of the GI tract to detect liver, adrenal, and nodal metastases as well as local recurrence because of the ability of CT to detect extraluminal masses.  CT of the pelvis has been recommended as a routine follow-up procedure in patients who have undergone abdominal-peroneal resection.  Both CT and MRI can be used to detect local recurrence, but suffer from the inability to differentiate scar from recurrent tumor.  The initial hope that MRI would be capable of differentiating postoperative scar tissue from recurrent tumor has not been realized.  Therefore, with positive CT or MRI findings, occasionally a percutaneous biopsy will be required to confirm local recurrence.
Liver tumor imaging.  Liver tumor imaging is the paradigm of the dilemma of diagnostic decision-making in the current era of abundant high technology.  In part, this is a reflection of the multiplicity of imaging techniques now in wide use worldwide.  These include ultrasound (US), radionuclide scintigraphy (RNS), computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and techniques especially designed for staging the extent of known liver cancer, such as computed tomography during arterial portography (CTAP) and intraoperative ultrasound (IOUS).  Most authorities concede that CT scanning is the single test most closely fitting the designation "gold standard" for liver tumor imaging, although MRI, a less mature technique, is already preferred by some.  Local factors profoundly influence the selection and sequence of imaging studies, including available equipment, radiologic skills, institutional interests, and especially the specific clinical circumstances of the patient.  Thus, diagnostic algorithms or decision trees for sequential imaging workup of liver tumor suspects tend to be somewhat institution specific.
Staging and follow-up of breast cancer patients.  Staging systems for breast cancer, unlike those of neoplasms in distant or recessed sites, allowed for the early development of clinical staging evaluation.  It was established that clinical assessment of the breast lesion was often wrong compared with the pathologic examination (benign vs.  malignant); clinical measurement of the tumor in centimeters was often larger than histologic size; and clinical assessment of axillary nodes (clear or metastatic) was incorrect in about 30% of cases.  Although both clinical and pathologic staging provide effective discriminants for prognosis of treated patients, prognosis is more accurately determined by the pathologic stage.  The single most important prognostic indicator is the axillary nodal status, and when positive, the number of positive nodes.  The American Joint Committee on Cancer and the Union International Contra Cancer have agreed on a TNM staging for breast carcinoma, and this is the preferable staging system.  Follow-up of treated patients is of most value in detecting local recurrence on the chest wall (after mastectomy) or in the irradiated breast (after lumpectomy), and also in early detection of contralateral breast cancer.  Physical examination and periodic mammography are most useful.  There is a tendency to overinvestigate asymptomatic patients (with bone scans, blood tests, etc.), but this has been correctly criticized in recent years.
Primary neoplasms of the central nervous system in children.  Modern diagnostic imaging techniques are able to detect primary neoplasms of the central nervous system (CNS) in children safely and accurately but with less specificity as to cell type or degree of malignancy.  These neoplasms, often peculiar in cell type and size, mediated by hydrocephalus in their clinical presentation, demand careful and often extensive imaging techniques best to evaluate their geography and character.  Added to these basic observations, determination of the neoplasm from surrounding edema, detection of possible spread, and evaluation of residual or recurrent neoplasm are prime responsibilities of the pediatric neuroradiologist toward the child, neurosurgeon, and oncologist.
Magnetic resonance imaging in the evaluation of spinal tumors.  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which has recently begun to replace myelography, postmyelography computed tomography (CT), and to some extent, bone scans, has become the procedure of choice in the evaluation of spinal tumors; the applications of MRI in this role are reviewed.  In the extradural space, MRI is the most sensitive technique for the detection of tumors in the vertebral bodies.  At the same time, it provides superb delineation of suspected thecal sac impingement.  In the intradural extramedullary space, MRI is generally as accurate as myelography and postmyelography CT while being noninvasive.  Finally, in the intramedullary space, MRI is unquestionably the procedure of choice in the evaluation of suspected cord tumors.  In general, MRI has become the best initial procedure in the evaluation of suspected tumors of the spine, regardless of the space in which they may lie; frequently, it is the only required examination.
Radioimmunology. Imaging and therapy.  Targeting of radioactivity to tumors using antitumor antibodies is evolving from a laboratory curiosity toward a practical diagnostic and therapeutic technique that promises widespread benefits for many common human cancers.  The development of the hybridoma technique by Kohler and Milstein for producing monoclonal antibodies is probably the single most important contribution to the development of this field.  A large array of monoclonal antibodies against many human tumors have been created and labeled with a variety of radioisotopes; 110 clinical trials have been identified from the literature between the interval of 1978 to the present.  These studies are beginning to form the basis for certain conclusions regarding likely benefits for certain combinations of antitumor antibodies and isotopes in specific instances of clinical management in patients with malignant neoplasms.  For example, in melanoma, lymphoma, neuroblastoma, and colorectal malignancies, radiolabeled antibodies have demonstrated occult tumors, which could not be disclosed with conventional methodologies.  Radioimmunotherapy of malignant lymphoma is achieving durable remissions in patients who have failed conventional forms of therapy.  For the most part, these advances have been achieved through intelligent application of known principles of immunochemistry, imaging physics, and tumor immunology.  Progress has been slow but steady.  In a few instances, the term "magic bullet" is warranted in describing the targeting of a particular radiolabeled antibody to a human tumor.  I-131, 3-F8, an IgG3 against the GD2 antigen of neuroblastoma, which was introduced by Cheung, and In-111 T-101, against the CD5 antigen of T-cells, which was developed by Royston, stand out because of the consistency and high concentration of radioactive targeting to human tumors in clinical trials.  If certain technical innovations fulfill their initial promise, the future will be bright for radioimmunologic methods of diagnosis and therapy.  Genetic engineering will permit the development of "humanized" antibodies with biologic properties that favor tumor localization.  New chemical approaches will broaden the range of isotopes available as diagnostic and therapeutic radiolabels.  Application of modern imaging methodologies, such as positron emission tomography (PET), will detect more lesions of smaller size and permit quantitative imaging for dosimetry considerations.  Greater speed and ease of use of computerized work stations will lead to the broader application of fusion imaging in which radioantibody images will be viewed simultaneously with TCT or MRI for better anatomic correlation of abnormal sites of antigen-reactive tumor deposits.
Single photon emission computed tomography and positron emission tomography in cancer imaging.  Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography (PET) are now being used to improve the information available from radioisotopic imaging of patients with cancer.  These nuclear medicine techniques offer the potential for studying regional function and biochemistry by using radiolabeled substrates.  The chemical changes of malignancy precede anatomic changes, and PET and/or SPECT may detect these changes before anatomic changes have occurred.  The superiority of SPECT compared with planar imaging has been demonstrated for cardiac and brain imaging.  Radiopharmaceuticals containing technetium 99 m (99mTc) are best suited for SPECT imaging because large amounts of radioactivity are administered and the collimator-camera systems are optimized for the 140 keV photons of 99mTc.  The current interest in imaging cancer with SPECT relates to the use of gallium 67 citrate and monoclonal antibodies labeled with iodine 123 or indium 111.  SPECT can image these radioisotopes, but the advantages compared with planar imaging have not been clearly defined.  Furthermore, the ability to quantitate the distribution of single photon emitters other than 99mTc has not been demonstrated.  New SPECT systems with three heads or rings of detectors offer promise for improved, quantitative imaging.  PET has the capability of imaging tracers with the biologically important elements C-11, N-13, O-15, and F-18 used for positron labeling.  These radioisotopes have short half-lives and require a cyclotron close to the PET facility.  The most prominently used radiopharmaceutical for PET is F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG).  PET studies with FDG in patients with primary brain tumors have demonstrated the ability to determine the degree of malignancy, to differentiate necrosis from recurrent tumor after radiation therapy or chemotherapy, and to predict prognosis.  Other metabolic functions of cancer have been studied, including amino acid accumulation, thymidine uptake, oxygen utilization, intermediary metabolism, and receptor status.  PET has the potential to make a major impact on the characterization of a malignancy and the effect of therapy.
New directions in medical imaging of cancer. Magnetic resonance methods and single photon emission computed tomography.  Magnetic resonance methods and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) are developing technologies that provide both functional and anatomic information.  Their role in the diagnosis and monitoring of cancer is the subject of current clinical research.  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) delineates organs and tissue heterogeneities using differences in the relaxation parameters of water and fat protons; both protons and other nuclei can be imaged or studied by magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) to provide information on the state of naturally occurring or infused molecules.  SPECT quantifies the distribution of radiolabeled agents in tissues and organs; labeled monoclonal antibodies provide highly specific imaging of tumors.  Spatial resolution is the limiting technologic factor.  Proton MRI provides the highest current resolution, better than 1 mm in vivo in deep tissues, whereas the resolution of MRS and SPECT is limited to several cubic centimeters.  Recent advances in these technologies have significantly increased their specificity and ability to detect small, deep lesions.
Imaging of adult central nervous system primary malignant gliomas. Staging and follow-up.  A classification and staging system for primary adult gliomas was proposed.  This system uses the high signal intensity found on proton density or T2-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) scans at the site of the tumor and surrounding edema (including infiltrating tumor).
Proliferation and DNA ploidy in malignant breast tumors in relation to early oral contraceptive use and early abortions.  In 175 premenopausal breast cancer patients, a history of oral contraceptive (OC) use before 20 years of age was significantly associated with higher tumor cell proliferative activity, as indicated by a higher S-phase fraction (SPF), and a higher fraction of DNA aneuploid tumors, compared with later or never users (P = 0.05 and p = 0.01, respectively).  The higher SPF among early OC users was apparent in patients with aneuploid tumors but not in patients with euploid tumors.  Abortions (spontaneous or induced) before the first full-term pregnancy also were associated with a higher SPF compared with other young patients with breast cancer (P = 0.03).  Adjusting for parity and abortions or OC use, respectively, an early OC use was associated with a 43% higher SPF and early abortions were associated with 49% higher SPF.  Younger patients had a higher SPF and a higher frequency of aneuploid tumors, but this was found to be because the users of OC had a lower median age at diagnosis.  Among never users, no significant age relationship was seen for SPF or the frequency of aneuploidy.  For the DNA analyses there is a selection of patients with breast cancer with larger tumors, and therefore the conclusions drawn in this article may not be generalizable to patients with smaller primary tumors, e.g., cases diagnosed at breast cancer screening.  The higher tumor proliferative activity and frequency of aneuploidy in early OC users are in line with previously reported findings of worse prognostic indicators and a worse survival in early users of OC compared with other young women with breast cancer.
Treatment of patients with advanced colorectal cancer with cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil, and leucovorin.  Based on in vitro studies that have demonstrated synergy between 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), leucovorin (LV), and cisplatin (CDDP) against human colon cancer cell lines, a clinical trial was initiated to determine the effects of this combination in patients with advanced unresectable colorectal carcinoma.  Fifty-nine patients were enrolled in the study and 12 of them had received prior conventional 5-FU chemotherapy.  Treatment consisted of 4 weekly courses of high-dose LV (200 mg/m2) administered by intravenous (IV) bolus, followed by 5-FU (550 mg/m2) and CDDP (20 mg/m2) each administered as a 2-hour infusion on 4 consecutive days.  After a median of 5.5 treatment cycles, objective tumor response was seen in 20 of 59 patients (34%) (this included 3 complete remissions).  The response rate in the 47 previously untreated patients was 38% (95% confidence limits, 26% to 53%).  Stable disease occurred in 16 (27%) patients, whereas the tumor progressed in 23 (39%) patients.  The median survival time was 11.5 months, with 15% of the patients alive at 2 years.  The regimen was well tolerated and the primary side effects were mild and reversible gastrointestinal symptoms and myelosuppression.  There was no episode of life-threatening toxicity.  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Grade III adverse reactions that required 25% dose reductions occurred in only 14% of the patients.  The results of this trial suggest that 5-FU, LV, and CDDP is an active, safe, and well-tolerated combination regimen in patients with advanced colorectal cancer.
Serum tumor markers and patient allocation to good-risk and poor-risk clinical trials in patients with germ cell tumors.  The allocation of patients with advanced germ cell tumors (GCT) to different treatment programs based on clinical characteristics is standard in the design of clinical trials today.  Studies have shown that substantial differences exist between entry criteria and that these differences could influence the outcome of clinical trials.  The factors contributing to these differences are not clear due to patient selection biases.  Two hundred five unselected and consecutive patients allocated to and treated in good-risk and poor-risk treatment programs at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) were reassigned risk status by the Indiana University (IU) Classification.  The results were compared with those of the Southeastern Cancer Study Group (SECSG).  The results using both criteria indicated substantial agreement in total end results and the identification of good-risk patients.  The results in poor-risk patients differed substantially, with 39 patients (19%) classified as poor-risk by MSKCC criteria and 66 (32%) by Indiana criteria.  The major discrepancy occurred in IU Stage 7, in which 26 of 32 patients (81%) achieved a complete response.  The major factor contributing to this difference in risk assignment was the use of serum tumor markers.  Serum tumor markers must be incorporated into risk assignment criteria for GCT clinical trials to minimize the number of good-risk GCT patients in poor-risk trials.
Salvage chemotherapy for patients with germ cell tumors. The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center experience (1979-1989).  Twenty-eight of 124 (23%) advanced germ cell tumor (GCT) patients who were treated on four successive platin-based induction regimens and who failed to achieve a durable complete response (CR) remain alive (median follow-up, 50 months).  An analysis of prognostic factors for response and survival was conducted on the 94 patients who received salvage chemotherapy.  Survival and/or response to salvage therapy were significantly enhanced for patients with a prior CR to induction chemotherapy, treatment with a cisplatin-based salvage regimen, a testis primary site, a normal serum human chorionic gonadotropin level, a normal serum lactate dehydrogenase level, one site of metastasis, and an Indiana Class of 6 or less.  Patients with a prior incomplete response (IR) had a particularly poor prognosis (P = 0.00007) with only 4 of 52 (9%) patients alive (median follow-up, 37 months) compared with 15 of 42 (36%) patients with a prior best response of a CR (median follow-up, 35 months).  The poor survival of patients who fail to achieve a durable CR to induction chemotherapy warrants the continued investigation of new salvage therapy.  The identification of prognostic features may direct salvage therapy and aid in the interpretation of clinical trials of salvage regimens.
The prognostic value of image analysis in ovarian cancer.  Histologic grading is very important for treatment decisions in ovarian cancer.  All grading systems contain a significant subjective component, which could be reduced by including objective measurements into the diagnostic decision.  Image analysis was used to determine nuclear area and ploidy distributions in 42 patients with epithelial ovarian cancer, and the results were related to tumor grade and clinical outcome.  The mean nuclear area, mean optical density, number of hyperploid cells, and the standard deviation between measurements were significantly higher in Grade 2 and 3 tumors compared with Grade 1 tumors, in rapidly progressive tumors compared with less aggressive malignancies, and in recurrent tumors compared with primary lesions.  The number of nuclei with very high DNA content was found to be of prognostic importance.  Image analysis thus provides additional prognostic information in epithelial ovarian cancer.
Resection of the primary liver cancer of the hepatic hilus.  Primary liver cancer (PLC) of the hepatic hilus was designated as a tumor situated at the main branch of the portal vein or pedicle of the hepatic veins in contact with the intrahepatic vena cava.  That is, the main tumor located at segment I, IV, V, or VIII and concentrating on the central part of the liver was called "the central type of PLC," which differed from a tumor located at segment II, III, VI, or VII; the latter was called "the peripheral type of PLC." Surgical treatment of the PLC has been significantly improved in the past two decades, but the resection of the central type of PLC is difficult and hazardous.  This institution admitted 903 PLC from January 1970 to April 1988, of which 118 cases were the central type; 65 cases were resected successfully, a resectability of 55.1%.  One patient died from sepsis within 1 month of operation (mortality 1.53%).  The modes of operation for the different segments are described, and suggestions for improvements are presented.  The survival rates were compared with a similar number of patients with the peripheral type of tumor in the same period and treated by the same surgeons.  The results show noticeable differences.  The one-year, three-year, and five-year survival rates after resection were 70.9%, 43.2%, and 39.2% in the central type of PLC; they were 98.3%, 85.0%, and 76.4% in the peripheral type of PLC (P less than 0.001).  Further discussion of improvements in surgical techniques and mental awareness are suggested.
Structural and functional integrity of ovarian tumor tissue obtained by ultrasonic aspiration.  For patients with ovarian epithelial cancer, survival increases when residual disease approaches zero after surgical removal of the tumor.  A previous study using the Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator (CUSA) (Cavitron Lasersonic Corp., Stamford, CT) showed the successful removal of ovarian tumors from areas often considered unresectable: the diaphragm, spleen, stomach, and small bowel.  However, the CUSA has not yet been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for gynecologic surgery except on an experimental basis.  This study was designed to test whether ultrasonic irradiation produced by the CUSA caused alterations in cell structure or physiology of gynecologic tissue in adjacent areas.  Paired tumor samples, unirradiated and irradiated, were obtained from ten patients, and portions were sent for pathologic structural evaluation and physiologic tissue culture evaluation.  Histologic sections, stained with hematoxylin and eosin, showed that CUSA irradiation produced only minor tissue distortion as observed under the light microscope.  A correct diagnosis would have been made in all cases had only tissue fragments obtained from the CUSA specimen trap been stained.  For nine of ten patients, initial tumor cell viability was similar in the two specimen types.  Flow cytometric DNA analysis confirmed that surgical methods produced matched samples.  Cells that survived high-frequency ultrasound appeared functionally intact.  For five of eight patients, the cells from the CUSA specimen traps survived and/or divided to a greater extent than those from the knife-dissected tumors.  Cells from both surgical routes attained a similar number of passages in culture.  It seems reasonable to extrapolate these in vitro observations with pelvic tumor tissues to normal surrounding tissue left in situ.  Thus pelvic tissue is believed to be uninjured by CUSA ultrasonic irradiation.
The expression of progesterone receptors coincides with an arrest of DNA synthesis in human breast cancer.  Two main models to account for the heterogeneous expression of estrogen receptors (ER) and progesterone receptors (PR) in human breast cancer have been proposed: the clonal model and the stem cell model.  The authors previously provided evidence supporting the stem cell model since it was found that most of the proliferating cells in ER-positive (ER+) human breast cancer lack ER and that the ER-negative (ER-) and ER+ subpopulations are interrelated.  The authors have analyzed in eighteen ER+/PR+ primary breast tumors the simultaneous expression of ER or PR (by immunohistochemistry) and DNA synthesis (by autoradiography) after 30 minutes of 3H-thymidine incorporation.  The authors demonstrated that: (1) the average numbers of ER+ and PR+ cells were similar (36.8 +/- 10.7% and 39.3 +/- 17.6%, respectively); (2) The thymidine-labeling indexes of the ER+, ER-, PR+, and PR- subpopulations were 0.53 +/- 0.69%, 0.74 +/- 0.49%, 0.21 +/- 0.21 and 0.94 +/- 0.54%, respectively; and (3) 75.2% of the DNA-synthesizing cells were ER-, and 88.8% of them were PR-.  The authors conclude that the cellular subpopulations expressing ER and PR were not identical, and the expression of PR was associated with a lower rate of cellular proliferation than was ER expression.
Amplification of oncogenes in mammary carcinoma shown by fine-needle biopsy.  A procedure that measures the amplification of oncogenes in human cancer cells is described.  The cells were obtained by fine-needle biopsy to allow repeated sampling from individual metastases.  A drawback was the low number of cells obtained, but this could be overcome by using a slot-blot hybridization technique to measure gene amplification.  Two patients with mammary cancer (primary tumors or metastases), analyzed for the levels of amplification of the oncogene erb-B2, are described in detail.  This technique is suitable for analyzing alterations occurring during cancer progression and for identifying subgroups of mammary cancer with different characteristics.
Predicting recurrence time of esophageal carcinoma through assessment of histologic factors and DNA ploidy.  Cytophotometric analysis of nuclear DNA content was done in 128 patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus.  The relationship among histopathologic features, DNA distribution pattern, and survival time was investigated from the standpoint of recurrence.  Of 128 patients, 77 (60.1%) died of recurrence within 2 years after surgery: 16 (12.5%) from 2 to 5 years and two (1.6%) over 5 years.  The rate of death of recurrence within 2 years was higher in patients with T4 or N1 than T1, T2, and T3 or N0 (P less than 0.01).  Survivors over 5 years more frequently possessed type II DNA pattern than types III and IV (P less than 0.05).  The rate of death of recurrence within 2 years was 34.4% in type II, which was lower than the 59.6% rate in type III (P less than 0.05) and the 76.6% rate in type IV (P less than 0.01).  Survivors from 2 to 5 years were higher in type III than in type IV (P less than 0.05), and recurrence over 5 years was found only in type II.  This inclination was more apparent in those with curative resection.  In the patients with type II, careful follow-up may be needed over 5 years for late recurrence.  However, in those with type IV, no recurrence over 2 years could be regarded as healed because most of their recurrences occur within 2 years.  These findings suggest that the growth rate of esophageal carcinoma should reflect DNA aneuploidy, and the DNA analysis of esophageal carcinoma should be a valuable parameter for postoperative follow-up planning.
Serial immunocytologic analysis of blood for tumor cells in two patients with neuroblastoma.  Tumor surveillance tests are used to determine whether malignant cells are responsive or resistant to therapeutic regimens.  For patients with neuroblastoma, conventional methods of surveillance are not sensitive enough.  Because tumor cells are shed into the circulation, immunocytologic analysis of blood may function as a sensitive monitoring system.  In this study, five blood samples were obtained from two patients with disseminated neuroblastoma at diagnosis and during therapy.  These samples were analyzed with monoclonal antibodies and immunoperoxidase staining to determine whether circulating neuroblasts were present.  In both patients, the presence or absence of circulating neuroblasts yielded information that was more sensitive than that from conventional tests.  The authors conclude that immunocytologic analysis of blood should be included with conventional monitoring methods for surveillance of patients with disseminated neuroblastoma.
A recurrent pelvic desmoid tumor successfully treated with tamoxifen.  A case of recurrent retroperitoneal desmoid tumor successfully treated with tamoxifen (Nolvadex tablets, ICI Pharma, Division of ICI Americas, Wilmington, DE) is reported.  The patient presented late in her second pregnancy with a large retroperitoneal pelvic desmoid tumor that was treated with surgical excision and megestrol acetate.  When the tumor recurred 12 months later, it was again treated with surgery, this time followed by radiation therapy.  The desmoid tumor quickly recurred.  The patient was then treated with tamoxifen, resulting in a complete tumor regression that has remained stable for 27 months.  Tamoxifen should be considered as first-line therapy in recurrent desmoid tumors.
Rural-urban differences in stage at diagnosis. Possible relationship to cancer screening.  Stage at diagnosis was examined for various malignancies identifiable through screening to determine whether rural-urban differences exist in Georgia.  Data were obtained from a population-based cancer registry which registers all incident cancers among residents of metropolitan Atlanta and ten neighboring rural counties.  Black and white patients with a first primary invasive malignancy newly diagnosed between 1978 and 1985 were included in this study.  Residents of the rural area were twice as likely to have unstaged cancers (18.3%) as were urban residents (9.6%).  Among patients with known stage at diagnosis, rural patients tended to have more advanced disease than urban patients.  The relative excess of nonlocalized malignancies in rural Georgia was 21% for whites and 37% for blacks.  The rural excess of nonlocalized prostate cancer among blacks was especially pronounced.  Differences in access to or utilization of early detection methods may contribute to the rural-urban differential in the extent of disease at diagnosis.
Detection by CT during arterial portography of colorectal cancer metastases to liver.  A prospective evaluation of the accuracy of real-time ultrasonography (US), computed tomography (CT), infusion hepatic angiography (IHA), and computed tomography during arterial portography (CT-AP) was performed on 65 resected liver metastases of colorectal cancers.  The total detection rate was 58.5 percent for US, 56.3 percent for CT, 55.4 percent for IHA, and 86.2 percent for CT-AP.  The sensitivity of 29 lesions with diameters of smaller than 1 cm was 65.5 percent for CT-AP, CT found only two, and both US and IHA localized no more than three.  The smallest lesions detectable by CT-AP were as small as 0.4 cm in diameter.  CT-AP proved most useful in detecting the liver metastases, and the use of this technique is recommended for preoperative planning of hepatectomy on patients with liver metastases.
Intraepithelial bodies in colorectal adenomas: Leuchtenberger bodies revisited.  The presence of intraepithelial inclusion bodies (Leuchtenberger bodies) was recorded in rectal or colonic specimens from 130 patients.  Large to moderate number of intraepithelial bodies were recorded in 81.8 percent of 55 colorectal adenomas from patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP).  Conversely, none of the 55 non-FAP adenomas or of the 20 specimens with ulcerative colitis (10 with dysplasia) had similar amounts of intraepithelial granules.  Feulgen studies demonstrated that the granules contain DNA and are probably nuclear fragments of destroyed lymphocytes.  Although the pathogenesis of this phenomenon remains obscure, it appears that the presence of large to moderate number of intraepithelial bodies in colorectal adenomas should strongly raise the suspicion of FAP.
Subsite distribution and incidence of colorectal cancer in New Zealand, 1974-1983.  The purpose of this study was to examine changes in subsite distribution and incidence of colorectal cancer within different age groups.  Registration of colorectal cancer by the National Cancer Registry of New Zealand approached 100 percent by 1974.  The present study was based on 15,395 individuals aged 25 years and over and registered for colorectal cancer between 1974 and 1983.  Subsite distribution (right colon, left colon, rectum) for different age groups (25-49, 50-69, 70+ years) was significantly skewed, with an excess of right colonic cancer in individuals aged 25-49 years and 70+ years.  This right colonic excess was accompanied by a relative reduction in left colonic cancer.  Age adjusted incidence rates for the periods 1974-78 and 1979-83 were compared and stratified by age group and subsite.  Incidence rates increased in all subsites in individuals aged 50+ years.  This was particularly evident for right sided cancer in the elderly of both sexes.  There was a marked reduction in the incidence of left colonic cancer and rectal cancer in individuals under 50 years.  In contrast, the incidence of right colonic cancer remained relatively stable in young individuals.  Time trend studies indicate that the skewed subsite distribution of large bowel cancer in different age groups may increase with time and is probably due to varying etiological factors acting on different cohorts.
Colorectal cancer: differences between community and geographically distant patients seen at an urban medical center.  Many studies in clinical oncology rely on hospital-derived patients.  Hospitals vary in the proportions of patients from the local catchment area vs.  those from more distant places, of whom a larger proportion are presumably referrals.  To study the differences between these two types of patients, we analyzed 1,245 colorectal cancer patients seen at a large urban medical center over a seven-year period.  Three hundred ninety-eight patients were from the local community (32 percent), 489 were from the extended community (39.3 percent), and 358 from more distant communities (28.8 percent).  The patients from the local community tended to be older and from minority ethnic groups.  In addition, the local community patients were more likely to have advanced disease at the time of presentation.  The grade of the tumor and its site distribution within the large bowel were similar for the three groups.  After adjusting for age, sex, race, and stage of disease, the survival was somewhat better for the distant community patients as compared with the local and extended communities (P less than 0.02).  Overall, in our patient population, the distant patients tended to have more favorable socioeconomic factors and less advanced disease, and these differences may account, in large part, for a better prognosis for these patients.  Particularly in large cooperative trials, studies may need to take into account the respective proportions of local community and geographically distant patients in analyzing and generalizing treatment outcomes.
Intra-abdominal desmoid tumors in familial polyposis coli: a case report of tumor regression by prednisolone therapy.  A case of intra-abdominal desmoid tumors in familial polyposis coli (FPC), which regressed and disappeared by prednisolone treatment, is reported.  A 37-year-old Japanese man with abdominal lumps was admitted to our hospital.  He had had proctocolectomy two years before because of FPC with rectal cancer.  At laparotomy, tumors were present in the abdominal wall, mesentery, and retroperitoneum.  Only a small part of the tumors was resected and diagnosed microscopically to be desmoid tumors.  With prednisolone administration (20 to 5 mg/day) subjective symptoms were ameliorated and desmoid tumors slowly regressed.  Bilateral hydronephrosis continued and resulted in "retroperitoneal fibrosis." To our knowledge, this case is the first well-documented case of retroperitoneal fibrosis in a patient with FPC.  The characteristics of the desmoid tumor in familial polyposis coli or in Gardner's syndrome and the methods for its management are discussed.
Polycystic ovary syndrome and bulimia.  One hundred fifty-three patients classified as suffering from polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) and 109 patients who were suffering from a clear organic disorder or endocrinopathy received the bulimia investigation test (Edinburgh) (BITE) questionnaire for abnormal eating behaviors.  Patients with PCOS showed a significant increase in their mean BITE score for approximately a third had abnormal eating patterns, and 6% have scores suggestive of clinical bulimia compared with only 1% of women in the group with organic endocrinopathies.  The work suggests that women with PCOS should be screened for abnormal eating behaviors and raises the possibility that treatment by psychological means should be considered when abnormal eating behaviors are present.
Endoscopic biopsy has limited accuracy in diagnosis of ampullary tumors.  Endoscopic biopsy specimens and surgically resected specimens in a collective series of 78 Japanese patients with ampullary tumor were retrospectively reviewed to investigate the clinical implications of endoscopic biopsy.  Endoscopic biopsy specimens were classified into five groups based on the degree of epithelial atypia: group 1 (no atypia), group 2 (mild atypia), group 3 (moderate atypia or adenoma), group 4 (severe atypia or carcinoma in situ), and group 5 (invasive carcinoma).  Final diagnosis of the 78 resected ampullary tumors was adenoma in five cases, carcinoma in 27 cases, and both adenoma and carcinoma in 46 cases.  Biopsy accuracy of carcinoma (group 4 or 5) was 70% (51 of 73) overall in 73 carcinoma cases.  Biopsy accuracy was 50% (7 of 14) in the intramural protruding type, 64% (21 of 33) in the exposed protruding type, and 88% (23 of 26) in the ulcerating type.  The diagnostic accuracy of adenoma (group 3) was 80% (4 of 5) in five cases of ampullary adenoma.  In 18 (25%) of the 73 carcinoma cases, biopsy diagnosis was adenoma (group 3), whereas carcinoma was found in the deeper layers of surgically resected specimens.  Biopsy diagnosis of adenoma does not rule out the possibility of deeper carcinoma in ampullary tumors.
Evaluation of endosonography in TN staging of oesophageal cancer.  Strategies for the treatment of cancer of the oesophagus depend on the tumour stage at the time of diagnosis.  Resection, the only curative treatment, is confined to early tumour stages.  Tumours with local infiltration are usually unresectable and require palliative treatment.  Computed tomography has been widely used for preoperative staging but often fails to define this correctly.  Endoscopic ultrasound allows direct visualisation of the parietal wall and may be useful in staging gastrointestinal tumours.  In a comparative prospective study, 52 patients with tumours of the oesophagus were investigated preoperatively both by endoscopic ultrasound and computed tomography to determine the stage of tumour infiltration and local lymph node involvement.  Thirty seven of these patients underwent operation, resection, or dissection and entered the study.  The intraoperative findings or the histopathological assessment, or both, were taken as a reference.  For all TN stages of oesophageal tumours, correct preoperative staging was accomplished by endoscopic ultrasound in 89% for T stage and 69% for N stage compared with 51% and 51% respectively by computed tomography (highly significant using Fisher's exact test).  This study shows that endoscopic ultrasound is useful in preoperative TN staging of tumours of the oesophagus.
Chondrosarcoma of the soft tissues. Two different sub-groups.  Chondrosarcomas arising from soft tissues are rare.  Two different varieties are described, myxoid and mesenchymal.  We have collected nine cases of the tumour, five myxoid and four mesenchymal, from a review of 513 cases of chondrosarcoma seen between 1904 and 1988.  We report the principal clinical, radiographical and histological differences between the two varieties and discuss their surgical treatment and prognosis.
Determination of plasma calcitonin gene-related peptide concentrations by a new immunochemiluminometric assay in normal persons and patients with medullary thyroid carcinoma and other neuroendocrine tumors.  There is doubt about concentrations of circulating calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and the value of plasma CGRP measurements in the detection and follow-up of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC).  Thus, we developed an immunochemiluminometric sandwich assay for CGRP using antibodies purified from a polyclonal antiserum against human CGRP.  The assay was sensitive (limit of detection, 0.4 pmol/L; multiply by 3.7892 to derive nanograms per L) and highly specific [no cross-reaction with human calcitonin (CT)].  Normal plasma CGRP values ranged from less than 0.4 to 4.5 pmol/L (median, 0.8; n = 31), with 61% having detectable levels.  Values in samples from patients with MTC were elevated: unoperated patients (n = 10), 4.7-137 pmol/L (median, 7.1); and operated patients with gross persistent or recurrent tumor (n = 14), 4.7-171 pmol/L (median, 23.2).  In contrast, CGRP values were normal in 78% of nine postoperative patients with elevated CT, but no detectable tumor (range, less than 0.4 to 6.3 pmol/L; median, 1.6).  CGRP levels increased after pentagastrin injection in MTC patients, but less than did CT values.  Cultured MTC cells in vitro secreted large amounts of CGRP, and rat nerve root ganglia, human osteoblasts, and microvessel endothelial cells secreted lesser amounts.  We conclude that CGRP circulates in normal plasma, but at very low levels.  Plasma CGRP concentrations are frequently high in patients with MTC, but primarily in those with gross tumor or metastases.  Plasma CT assay is the preferable test for MTC, but CGRP assay deserves prospective study for a possible role in predicting gross metastasis.
Use of m-[131I]iodobenzylguanidine in the treatment of malignant pheochromocytoma.  The efficacy and safety of m-[131I]iodobenzylguanidine ([131I]MIBG) were assessed in 15 patients with malignant pheochromocytomas in a nonrandomized, single arm trial, in which patients were treated with [131I]MIBG (SA, 740 megabequerel/mg) every 3 months.  Seven of these patients had bone and soft tissue metastases, 4 had only soft metastases, and 4 had only bone metastases.  The follow-up period ranged from 6-54 months; the number of doses ranged from 2-11, with 2.9 (78.4 mCi) to 9.25 gigabequerel (GBq) (250 mCi)/administration and a cumulative activity from 11.1-85.90 GBq (300-2322 mCi).  The absorbed cumulative dose in tumors ranged from 12-155 Gy.  A beneficial effect of the treatment was observed in 9 patients (60%).  No complete remission of the disease was observed.  Seven patients died during the study, among whom 4 never responded to the treatment.  Seven had hormonal responses (4 complete and 3 partial), with a duration ranging from 5-48 months.  Among these patients, 4 relapsed, and 3 died within 3 months.  Five patients had partial tumoral responses mainly located in soft tissues and for a duration ranging from 29-54 months.  All patients with a hormonal response had objective improvement in clinical status and blood pressure.  There was no clear-cut relationship between the cumulative dose and the responses.  The main side-effect observed in 1 patient with widespread bone metastases after three doses (12.9 GBq) was a pancytopenia, which resolved after treatment was discontinued.  This study suggests that repeated [131I]MIBG treatment could be effective in patients with advanced malignant pheochromocytoma.
Quantitation of G0 and G1 phase cells in primary carcinomas. Antibody to M1 subunit of ribonucleotide reductase shows G1 phase restriction point block.  Human cancers have an apparent low growth fraction, the bulk of cells presumed to being out of cycle in a G0 quiescent state due to the inability in the past to distinguish G0 from G1 cells.  The allosteric M1 subunit of ribonucleotide reductase (M1-RR) is constitutively expressed by cycling cells (i.e., G1, S, G2-M).  It is acquired during transition from G0 to G1, lost during exit to G0 and thus distinguishes G0 from G1 cells.  To estimate the proportion of G0 and G1 cells in primary human breast (n = 5) and colorectal (n = 12) adenocarcinomas, we used both analytical DNA flow cytometry (ADFC) and immunoperoxidase staining of sections with the monoclonal antibody to M1-RR (MAb M1-RR).  ADFC of fresh tumors revealed a low percentage of cells in the S phase (4.0 +/- 3.4%) but immunoperoxidase staining for M1-RR revealed an unexpectedly high proportion of positive cells (52.4 +/- 12.7%) in the G1, S, G2-M phases indicating a high G1 content of primary human tumors.  Thus, human cancers are blocked in transition in G1 and are not predominantly in a G0 or quiescent differentiated state.  This block was interpreted to mean that human cancers are responding to putative regulatory events at a restriction point in the G1 phase, such as relative growth factor deficiency, density inhibition, antiproliferative cytokines, or gene products.  Using flow cytometry for both DNA and M1-RR content we found that human colon cancer cell lines arrest in the G1 but not G0 phase upon serum deprivation or density inhibition.  Similarly, human breast cancer cell lines are arrested in G1 but not G0 phase by medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) or tamoxifen exposure.  These findings match our in situ observations, and support the concept of a restriction point block in primary human tumors.
Insulin-like growth factor II-mediated proliferation of human neuroblastoma.  Neuroblastoma is an embryonal tumor that typically arises in cells of the developing adrenal medulla.  IGF-II mRNA is expressed at high levels in the adrenal cortex before birth but it is not detectable until after birth in the adrenal medulla.  Neuroblastoma cell lines corresponding to early adrenal medullary precursors did not express IGF-II, although all three cell lines we tested were growth stimulated by IGF-II.  Cell lines corresponding to more mature adrenal medullary cells expressed IGF-II, and one, SK-N-AS, grows by an IGF-II autocrine mechanism (J.  Clin.  Invest.  84:829-839) El-Badry, Romanus, Helman, Cooper, Rechler, and Israel.  1989.  An examination of human neuroblastoma tumor tissues for IGF-II gene expression using in situ hybridization histochemistry revealed that IGF-II is expressed by tumor cells in only 5 of 21 neuroblastomas, but is detectable in cells of nonmalignant tissues including adrenal cortical cells, stromal fibroblasts, and eosinophils in all 21 tumors.  These findings indicate that IGF-II may function as an autocrine growth factor for some neuroblastomas and as a paracrine growth factor for others.  They suggest that the growth regulatory pathways utilized by neuroblastoma mimic those used in the precursor cell type from which individual tumors arise.
Patterns of epidermal growth factor receptors in basal and squamous cell carcinoma.  The presence of immunoreactive epidermal growth factor receptors in human skin tumors was investigated using the indirect immunoperoxidase technique.  Sixteen basal cell carcinomas and 11 squamous cell carcinomas were evaluated.  All of the specimens studied were receptor positive.  In 70% of the specimens there was prominent staining of the cell membranes.  In 54% of the nodular basal cell carcinoma specimens there was increased staining at the periphery of the tumor cell masses.
Basal cell carcinoma recurring after radiotherapy: a unique, difficult treatment subclass of recurrent basal cell carcinoma.  Twenty-seven basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) recurring following radiation therapy alone or in addition to other treatment modalities were treated with Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS) from 1983 to 1989.  Mean tumor size was 2.1 cm.  Of the tumors, 70.4% arose in the mid-face region, 55.6% had undergone multiple previous treatment modalities.  The present recurrence rate is 7.4% (mean follow-up: 25 months).  Basal cell carcinoma recurring following radiotherapy deserves special subclassification among recurrent BCC.  It is very difficult to eradicate, with high recurrence rates following standard surgical excision or further radiotherapy.  Tumors are usually large, aggressive, and invasive.  Most arise in the cosmetically crucial mid-face region, where extension into subcutaneous tissue planes is common.  Mohs surgery, with its inherent abilities to examine all margins, map tumor extension, and conserve tissue, is uniquely suited to treatment of these difficult tumors.
The medical necessity of evaluation and treatment of port-wine stains.  New lasers and improved laser delivery systems have allowed for the safe and effective treatment of port-wine stains in patients of all ages.  The satisfactory results obtained by laser treatment have increased the number of patients seeking consultation regarding their birthmarks.  It is imperative that physicians recognize the various medical syndromes and problems associated with port-wine stains.  A review of 415 patients with facial port-wine stains has revealed hypertrophy and/or nodularity in 65% of patients by the fifth decade of life, which increases significantly the morbidity of these lesions.  It is believed that laser treatment will minimize the medical and psychologic complications that result from the natural evolution of port-wine stains.
Retroviral transduction of protein kinase C-gamma into cytotoxic T lymphocyte clones leads to immortalization with retention of specific function.  The molecular pathways that are responsible for delivering the proliferative signals from the cell surface to the nucleus in T lymphocytes are still unresolved, but recent data implicates protein kinase C (PKC) involvement in the TCR signaling pathway.  To further address the role of PKC in T cell activation, the effects of high level expression of the PKC-gamma isoenzyme in murine CTL clones were examined.  Unlike the parental cells that required periodic Ag stimulation for cell activation and growth, cells expressing a retrovirally transduced PKC-gamma gene propagated in culture independent of the need for Ag stimulation, although maintaining identical functional specificity to the parental CTL.  Constitutive PKC-gamma expression may therefore mimic physiologic PKC activation, thereby abrogating the requirement for TCR-Ag interaction in T cell activation.
Dexamethasone inhibits the induction of monocyte chemotactic-activating factor production by IL-1 or tumor necrosis factor.  Recently purified and molecularly cloned monocyte chemotactic and activating factor (MCAF) may play a major role in recruiting and activating monocytes in the inflammatory process.  We examined the effects of a potent anti-inflammatory agent, dexamethasone (DXS), on the production of this factor.  Over a wide range of concentrations (10(-5) to 10(-8) M), DXS inhibited the production of MCAF at the mRNA and protein level in a human fibrosarcoma cell line, which was stimulated with either IL-1 or TNF-alpha.  We examined the turn-over of synthesized MCAF mRNA that showed DXS decreased the stability of MCAF mRNA.  Furthermore, the addition of actinomycin D and cycloheximide abolished this effect of DXS, indicating that de novo mRNA and protein synthesis were required for this process.  In addition, a nuclear run-off analysis revealed that DXS also inhibited the transcription of IL-1- or TNF-activated MCAF genes.  Therefore, both the destabilization of MCAF mRNA and the inhibition of transcription of the gene contribute to the decrease in the MCAF mRNA steady state level by DXS.
DNA sequences 3' of the Ig H chain cluster rearrange in mouse B cell lines.  A mouse myeloma cell line MPC11 (IgG2b, kappa) and variants derived from it have been used to study DNA rearrangements that occur at the Ig H chain locus.  One variant, F5.5, has acquired both VH gene and C epsilon gene rearrangements.  Through genomic Southern blot analysis initially directed to mapping the C epsilon gene rearrangement, we observed that the VH region rearrangement was linked, through an inversion event, to sequences that originate 3' of the CH cluster, i.e., 3' of the C alpha gene.  Subsequent studies have shown that DNA rearrangements within the region 3' of the C alpha gene are detected in several other mouse myeloma and hybridoma cell lines and are not associated with the expression of specific isotypes.
Examination of HTLV-I integration in the skin lesions of various types of adult T-cell leukemia (ATL): independence of cutaneous-type ATL confirmed by Southern blot analysis.  The various clinical features of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) are frequently accompanied by skin eruptions.  Recently, a cutaneous type of ATL has been proposed by clinical studies.  We analyzed the viral integration of human T-cell leukemia virus-I (HTLV-I) and monoclonal rearrangement of T-cell receptor (TCR) gene in blood lymphocytes and the cutaneous infiltrated cells of nine ATL patients with various clinical features and skin eruptions.  We classified them by the results of Southern blot analysis and propose a cutaneous-type ATL accordingly.  In two of them, we could detect the monoclonal integration of HTLV-I and T-cell monoclonality only in the skin but not in the peripheral lymphocytes.  We also demonstrated the time course study in one patient.  Clinicians should be aware of the HTLV-I positive cutaneous T cell lymphoma that can be named cutaneous-type ATL.  Examination of viral integration and T-cell monoclonality in skin lesions is required to make an exact diagnosis of cutaneous ATL.
Immunolocation of TNF-alpha/cachectin in human melanoma cells: studies on co-cultivated malignant melanoma.  We have investigated the ability of metastatic cells to produce the macrophage cytokine, TNF-alpha/cachectin, as these cells have macrophage-like properties such as infiltration and migration.  We looked for TNF-alpha/cachectin in three tumor cell lines derived from human malignant melanomas and six co-cultivated malignant melanomas derived, in vitro, from these three cell lines plus angioma fibroblasts.  Immunohistochemistry with an anti-TNF-alpha/cachectin monoclonal antibody showed that TNF-alpha/cachectin was produced by two of the three parent melanoma cell lines.  All the tumor cells in both the co-cultivated malignant melanomas and their in vitro tumorous nodules produced TNF-alpha/cachectin, even those derived from the melanoma cell line, which originally did not.  The results clearly show that TNF-alpha/cachectin can be produced by non-hematopoietic tumor cells.  A co-cultivated tumor model prepared from other types of human tumor cell lines promises to provide a useful tool for exploring the relationship between TNF-alpha/cachectin and oncogenesis.
Immunohistochemical alterations in basement membrane components of squamous cell carcinoma.  To investigate alterations in the basement membrane (BM) in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), we investigated 20 tumors.  Four had the cytologic characteristics of Bowen's disease (SCC-BD) and 16 did not have them (SCC-NB).  Tumors were studied immunohistochemically by double immunofluorescent staining by using mouse monoclonal antibodies to the core protein of heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) and chondroitin 6-sulfate glycosaminoglycan (Ch6S) as well as rabbit antiserum to laminin (LN) and type IV collagen (C-4).  In well-differentiated and highly keratinized SCC-NB, LN, C-4, and HSPG could be detected in the tumor nest BM and showed no loss of continuity, but they were largely lost in poorly differentiated and poorly keratinized SCC-NB.  This suggests that poorly differentiated SCC-NB cause greater enzymatic degradation of BM components than well-differentiated SCC-NB.  Ch6S was detected in parts of the BM of SCC-BD, but it was absent in all SCC-NB examined.  It appears that SCC-NB have lost the ability to synthesize Ch6S, and that SCC-BD degrade Ch6S although they continue to produce it.  Thus, it appears that in SCC the BM is qualitatively different from that of normal epidermis, and that SCC-BD can be distinguished from SCC-NB by the Ch6S content of the BM.
Identification of a melanoma progression antigen as integrin VLA-2.  The expression of the integrin receptors VLA-1, -2, -3, and -6 was studied in normal cultured melanocytes and in five melanoma cell lines.  Normal melanocytes synthesized VLA-3, but did not reveal detectable levels of VLA-1, -2, and -6.  All melanoma cell lines, however, expressed VLA-2, -3, and -6.  VLA-1 was synthesized by two of five melanoma lines.  In parallel, we had analyzed the expression of four previously characterized melanoma cell surface antigens.  One of them (antigen A.1.43), which is associated with tumor progression of human melanoma, revealed a striking similarity to VLA-2.  In sequential immunoprecipitation experiments, we show that A.1.43 is identical with the integrin VLA-2, a cell surface receptor for collagen, laminin, and fibronectin.
Reproducibility of image interpretation in immunoscintigraphy performed with indium-111- and iodine-131-labeled OC125 F(ab')2 antibody injected into the same patients.  An important criterion for the clinical use of a new imaging technique is the correct reproducibility of interpretation.  Forty-six paired immunoscintigraphic examinations were performed on 43 patients with suspected ovarian carcinoma recurrence using F(ab')2 fragments of OC125 antibody labeled first with indium-111 and then with iodine-131.  Planar scintigraphy (PS) and emission computed tomography (ECT) images were interpreted blindly and separately by three observers, and reproducibility was evaluated by a kappa concordance index.  Intra- and interobserver reproducibility were generally satisfactory (kappa values of 0.6 and 0.7, respectively).  Binomial analysis of kappa values for ECT showed the superiority of indium-111 for intraobserver (p = 0.035) and interobserver (p = 0.0039) study.  However, for PS there was no significant difference in reproducibility with the two radionuclides.
Relationship of uptake of technetium-99m(Sn)-N-pyridoxyl-5-methyltryptophan by hepatocellular carcinoma to prognosis   The relationship of technetium-99m(Sn)-N-pyridoxyl-5-methyltryptophan (99mTc-PMT) uptake by hepatic tumors to survival was studied in 162 cases of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).  The median survival of 82 patients in whom hepatic tumors showed increased uptake in delayed 99mTc-PMT imaging was 1013 days, which was significantly longer than the survival time of 398.5 days of 80 patients in whom hepatic tumors did not show increased uptake of radioactivity (p less than 0.002).  The relationship between the ability of hepatic tumors to take up 99mTc-PMT and survival was also analyzed in patients with HCC showing filling defects in 99mTc-colloid liver images and, in relation to the therapy, serum values of bilirubin and alpha-fetoprotein.  Results indicated that the degree of 99mTc-PMT uptake by hepatic tumors is closely correlated with the prognosis of patients with HCC.
Comparison of 1073 MBq and 3700 MBq iodine-131 in postoperative ablation of residual thyroid tissue in patients with differentiated thyroid cancer.  In a randomized prospective study, we compared the efficacy of low dose (1073 MBq) and high dose (3700 MBq) iodine-131 administration in postoperative ablation of residual functioning thyroid tissue in 63 patients with differentiated thyroid cancer.  We were unable to demonstrate any difference between the low- and the high-dose of radioactive iodine in scintigraphic ablation of remnant tissue.  In 81% (21/26) of the patients, 1073 MBq ablated after the first dose, 77% (21/26 + 3/5 = 24/31) after the first plus second dose, and 69% (24/31 + 0/4 = 24/35) after the first, second, and third dose.  Radioiodine (3700 MBq) ablated in 84%, 73%, and 69% of the patients after respectively 1., 1.  plus 2., and 1.  plus 2.  plus 3.  dose.  Forty percent of the patients ablated with the low dose and 44% ablated with the high dose had elevated thyroglobulin levels at the time of complete scintigraphic ablation.  In conclusion, we did not find any difference between 3700 MBq and 1073 MBq iodine-131 as regard to number of doses needed for complete scintigraphic ablation of residual functioning thyroid tissue.
Extracranial metastatic glioblastoma: appearance on thallium-201-chloride/technetium-99m-HMPAO SPECT images.  Sequential thallium-201-chloride and technetium-99m-hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) images were obtained in a patient with extracranial metastatic glioblastoma multiforme.  Thallium-201 uptake was high (three times the scalp background) in all pathologically confirmed extracranial metastases and moderate (1.6 times scalp background) intracranially, where most biopsy specimens showed gliosis with scattered atypical astrocytes.  Technetium-99m-HMPAO uptake was decreased intracranially in the right frontal and parietal lobes which had been irradiated.  It was also decreased in one well-encapsulated scalp lesion and high in another scalp mass with less defined borders.  Possible mechanisms of tumor uptake of these agents are reviewed.
Technetium-99m-methylene diphosphonate (MDP) uptake in a sympathetic effusion: an index of malignancy and a review of the literature.  We report a patient with a sympathetic pleural effusion secondary to T-cell lymphoma that accumulated the bone imaging agent, Technetium-99m-methylene diphosphonate (99mTc-MDP).  This case is significant in that malignant cells were not present on three cytologic examinations of the pleural fluid or multiple pleural biopsies.  We also present a review of the published literature on pleural effusions that accumulate bone tracers.  We conclude that pleural effusions that accumulate 99mTc-MDP should be considered malignant or secondary to a malignancy and further work-up is essential even if the cytologic exam of the pleural fluid is unremarkable.
HTLV-I-associated leukemia/lymphoma in south Florida.  We report here 10 cases of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) seen in South Florida between February 1988 and July 1989.  All were seropositive for human T-lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) and seronegative for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1).  DNA extracted from tumor biopsies/peripheral blood lymphocytes of nine patients was shown by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to contain HTLV-I proviral DNA.  Blot hybridization of DNA extracted from seven patients with an HTLV-I cDNA probe revealed a monoclonal pattern of proviral integration consistent with a diagnosis of ATL.  Eight of the 10 patients were women.  Six patients were from Haiti, three from Jamaica, and one from the Bahamas.  All patients had very aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.  Two patients presented with sinus and retro-orbital involvement; another had gastric lymphoma that perforated.  Nine patients developed hypercalcemia.  Eight patients died within 1 year of diagnosis.  Two were lost to follow-up.  During the course of this study, 66 new cases of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma were diagnosed at this hospital.  Ten of these cases were ATL.  The prevalence of HTLV-I-related lymphoma in this sample was 15%.  Since tissue from all patients was not available for HTLV-I screening, however, it is possible that other cases of ATL went undetected.  We conclude from this initial survey that a retroviral etiology should be considered in patients from populations known to be at risk for HTLV-I infection who present with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Comparison of characteristics of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma associated with head and neck cancer and those with gastric cancer.  In ongoing reviews of 339 patients with surgically treated primary squamous cell carcinoma, there were 19 (5.6%) with concurrent gastric cancer and 11 (3.2%) with head and neck cancer.  The incidences of intra-esophageal multiple occurrence of esophageal cancer are 27.3% and 26.3% in those with associated head and neck cancer and gastric cancer, respectively, and higher than 7.1% in those without such a concurrent cancer.  There was no difference in the clinicopathological characteristics of those with concurrent head and neck and gastric cancers, except for the higher incidence of metachronous occurrence in the former.  These findings suggest that, in cases of esophageal cancer associated with concurrent head and neck cancer and gastric cancer, intraesophageal multiplicity of the esophageal carcinoma is frequent and that preoperative serial evaluations is most important to design treatment and estimate the prognosis.
Activation and in vitro expansion of tumor-reactive T lymphocytes from lymph nodes draining human primary breast cancers.  The feasibility of in vitro activation of lymphocytes from the draining lymph nodes (DLN) of breast cancer patients was examined.  Lymphocytes isolated from 48 DLN from 12 patients were examined for their proliferative responses to rIL-2, autologous tumor cells, or rIL-2 plus tumor cells.  Three general patterns of cellular responses were observed.  Cells from some DLN (17%) were unresponsive to any stimuli.  Lymphocytes from 52% of the DLN responded moderately to rIL-2 alone.  The combination of rIL-2 and tumor antigen had a synergistic effect on the proliferation of cells from 31% of the DLN assayed.  Phorbol dibutyrate and ionomycin plus rIL-2 stimulated expansion of DLN lymphocytes by up to 850-fold after 35 days.  These expanded cell populations, as well as those stimulated with antigen plus rIL-2, were predominantly CD3+ and CD16- cells, varying in proportions of CD4+ and CD8+ subsets.  Both populations were cytotoxic against autologous tumor, MCF-7, and K562 target cells.
Neuroendocrine carcinoid tumours of the breast: a variant of carcinoma with neuroendocrine differentiation.  Carcinoid tumours most frequently develop in the gastrointestinal tract but have been described in many organs of the body.  In 1977 the first cases were reported in the mamma, followed by descriptions of argyrophilic carcinoid-like, neuroendocrine mammary tumours by many investigators who performed immunohistochemical and ultrastructural examinations.  The existence of true carcinoids in the mamma is still a controversial issue.  Eight mammary neoplasms with monomorphous cytonuclear features, five of the small cell carcinoid-like variety and three composed of larger cells, were examined by immunohistochemical and ultrastructural examination.  We believe this kind of tumours are ductal or lobular carcinomas with focal or more extensive neuroendocrine features and are the result of a dual differentiation of neoplastic precursor stem cells along epithelial and endocrine lines.  Consequently, we consider that treatment of such cases should not be different from that of the ordinary type of mammary carcinomas.
Characterization and histopathological correlation of cytosol proteins of benign and malignant breast tumors.  Significant differences in cytosol protein level exist between normal/benign and cancerous breast tissues.  There is a positive correlation between the cytosol protein level and histological grade of carcinoma.  Well-differentiated carcinoma have a lower value of cytosol protein than poorly differentiated carcinoma.  In slab gel electrophoregrams, the total numbers of bands are almost identical in normal, benign, and malignant conditions.  In addition, 37 Kd protein band is consistently present in malignant cases and always absent in normal or benign cases.  More extensive biophysical examination of this band may provide further insight into the protein alterations in cancer cells at the molecular level.
Lactation following conservation surgery and radiotherapy for breast cancer.  A 38-year-old woman with early stage invasive breast cancer was treated with wide excision of the tumor, axillary lymph node dissection, and breast irradiation.  Three years later, she gave birth to a normal baby.  She attempted breast feeding and had full lactation from the untreated breast.  The irradiated breast underwent only minor changes during pregnancy and postpartum but produced small amounts of colostrum and milk for 2 weeks postpartum.  There are only a few reports of lactation after breast irradiation.  These cases are reviewed, and possible factors affecting breast function after radiotherapy are discussed.  Because of scant information available regarding its safety for the infant, nursing from the irradiated breast is not recommended.
Subrenal capsule assay as a chemosensitivity test for primary esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.  The efficiency of the subrenal capsule assay (SRCA) was studied with fresh tissue of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.  The day-to-day changes in 10 carcinoma cases were evaluated for 9 days.  The cancer cells continued to proliferate from the 3rd to the 7th day after the implantation and then decreased.  The host reaction was recognized histologically from the 3rd or 4th day to the 9th day.  However, the immune reaction did not significantly influence the evaluation of SRCA until the 7th day.  The immunohistochemical staining with anti-bromodeoxyuridine monoclonal antibody revealed the existence of cancer cells at the DNA synthesizing stage (S stage) in the graft until the 7th day.  In chemosensitivity test by SRCA, 21 patients were studied, and all were evaluable.  5-FU administration produced a response in 8/21 cases (38.1%), VDS in 8/21 (38.1%), and CDDP in 3/21 (14.3%).  Used in combination, CDDP + VDS was effective in 7/18 cases (38.9%) and CDDP + BLM in 6/18 cases (33.3%).
Squamous carcinoma of the distal esophagus: a survival study.  A survival study for squamous carcinomas of the distal esophagus treated by the Southern California Permanente Medical Group in the interval of 1954 to 1988 was undertaken.  We found radiation therapy and surgery equally efficacious in terms of cure for patients without distant disease and performance status sufficient to tolerate treatment.  We did not find survival benefit for patients treated with palliative surgery, and plan less invasive endoscopic means along with chemotherapy and radiation for palliation, reserving surgery for special circumstances.
Lymphoscintigraphy with 123I-labelled epidermal growth factor   We have used 123I-labelled epidermal growth factor (EGF) scans to study 14 patients with advanced cervical cancer.  Abnormal lymph node imaging was seen most clearly 6-8 h after the injection and revealed abnormal uptake by pelvic lymph nodes in 11 patients.  4 of these 11 had abnormal computerised tomographic and ultrasound scans; in the other 7 conventional radiology did not confirm the presence of disease.
Imaging modalities in recurrent head and neck tumors.  Patients with recurrent neoplasms of the head and neck present perplexing management problems, and accurate preoperative assessment of their disease is crucial.  Thirty-eight patients with suspected recurrent neoplasms comprise this study: 30 had computed tomography scans, 4 had magnetic resonance images, and 4 patients underwent both computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging to assess the anatomical extent of pathology in 34 malignant and 4 benign tumors.  Contrast enhancement was essential for detecting disease on computed tomography scan.  Differentiation of recurrent tumor was more difficult when the patient had undergone radiation.  Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated superior visibility in recurrent parotid and paranasal sinus neoplasm, but was less helpful in laryngeal and pharyngeal recurrences.  Computed tomography demonstration of a mass with infiltration of normal fat or tissue planes or lymphadenopathy correlated highly with recurrent disease.  Imaging techniques and fine points for determining recurrent neoplasms are presented.
The use of bromodeoxyuridine cytokinetic studies as a prognostic indicator of cancer of the head and neck.  Traditional measures of head and neck tumors often fail to predict patient outcome or clinical course, particularly in nonadvanced disease.  This problem of unpredictable tumor behavior has been one focus of cell proliferation studies.  Such studies, however, have been limited by difficult methodology.  A newer method of quantifying tumor cell proliferation using bromodeoxyuridine is applicable for head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, as shown in the present study.  The relative ease with which cell proliferation can be evaluated using this technique will allow large numbers of head and neck tumors to be studied, enabling correlations with tumor behavior to be made.
Introduction to limb-salvage surgery for sarcomas.  This article provides a history of limb-salvage surgery and definitions of terms used to describe aspects of the procedure.  Staging is also discussed.
Limb salvage in pediatric surgery. The use of the expandable prosthesis.  Limb sparing in growing children has proved to be very effective from an oncologic perspective, with good, long-term acceptance by the patients.  As in the adult, when performed by experienced surgeons, limb sparing neither compromises the survival rate nor significantly increases the local recurrence rate, compared with cross-bone amputation.  Discussions include patient evaluation, surgical options, materials and methods, and results.
Resection and reconstruction for bone tumors in the proximal tibia.  The proximal tibia is a common site for both benign and malignant tumors.  This article reviews pertinent anatomy, clinical presentation, and staging methods for tumors of this area.  Discussion is given to various methods of resection and reconstruction with useful guidelines for procedure selection.  The use of allografts for reconstruction is discussed in depth.
Endoprosthetic reconstruction after bone tumor resections of the proximal tibia.  The advent of successful adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation therapy protocols for primary malignant tumors and the development of custom-designed metallic endoprostheses has now made possible a successful limb salvage procedure for malignancies of the proximal tibia.  Use of the transposed medial gastrocnemius flap, as proposed by Dr.  Jean Duboussett of Paris, has been critical to the soft-tissue reconstruction that routinely permits an excellent active and passive range of motion for these patients.  This article describes the operative techniques and technical considerations necessary for a successful proximal tibial endoprosthesis reconstruction.
Resection and reconstruction for soft-tissue sarcomas of the extremity.  Soft-tissue sarcomas are uncommon malignant tumors, and when a diagnosis is made early, the patient has up to an 80% chance of surviving.  In treating soft-tissue sarcomas, the goal of the surgeon is the prolongation of patient survival, the total eradication of local disease, and the minimization of functional deficits.  In addition to treatment, this article discusses evaluation, histology, and staging.
Allograft reconstructions of the shoulder after bone tumor resections.  Large skeletal defects resulting from tumor resections about the shoulder create reconstructive challenges for the orthopedic surgeon.  Bone allografts offer several advantages compared with other reconstructive techniques, and functional outcomes are generally satisfactory.  They may be used either as osteoarticular grafts, intercalated segments to create an arthrodesis, or in combination with standard proximal humerus metallic implants.  Patient expectations and specific oncologic factors must be considered when selecting the optimal method of reconstruction.
Resections and reconstructions for tumors of the distal radius.  The primary objective in surgical management of the patient with a distal radius tumor is control of the disease.  Accurate staging and diagnostic methods applied preoperatively will predict not only the amount of resection necessary to obtain adequate tumor margins, but also the amount of remaining bone and soft tissues to assist reconstruction.  With this information, a method of reconstruction can be chosen that provides the patient optimal long-term function and stability with predictable results and the fewest potential complications.
Tumors of the shoulder girdle. Technique of resection and description of a surgical classification.  Limb-sparing surgery is safe and reliable for most bone and soft-tissue tumors of the shoulder girdle.  Eighty to ninety percent of patients with high-grade sarcomas of the shoulder can be safely treated by the various surgical techniques described.  Attention must be paid to appropriate patient selection, preoperative staging, and planning.  In addition, careful skeletal and muscular reconstruction of the surgical defect is necessary for a successful outcome.  A new, universal, classification schemata (types I-VI) of shoulder girdle resections has been developed.  This classification system is based on the bones resected, the status of the abductor mechanism, and the relationship to the glenohumeral joint.  This system permits easy description and comparison of the various limb-sparing procedures performed.
cDNA cloning and sequencing of human fibrillarin, a conserved nucleolar protein recognized by autoimmune antisera.  We have isolated a 1.1-kilobase cDNA clone that encodes human fibrillarin by screening a hepatoma library in parallel with DNA probes derived from the fibrillarin genes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (NOP1) and Xenopus laevis.  RNA blot analysis indicates that the corresponding mRNA is approximately 1300 nucleotides in length.  Human fibrillarin expressed in vitro migrates on SDS gels as a 36-kDa protein that is specifically immunoprecipitated by antisera from humans with scleroderma autoimmune disease.  Human fibrillarin contains an amino-terminal repetitive domain approximately 75-80 amino acids in length that is rich in glycine and arginine residues and is similar to amino-terminal domains in the yeast and Xenopus fibrillarins.  The occurrence of a putative RNA-binding domain and an RNP consensus sequence within the protein is consistent with the association of fibrillarin with small nucleolar RNAs.  Protein sequence alignments show that 67% of amino acids from human fibrillarin are identical to those in yeast fibrillarin and that 81% are identical to those in Xenopus fibrillarin.  This identity suggests the evolutionary conservation of an important function early in the pathway for ribosome biosynthesis.
Free radical-derived quinone methide mediates skin tumor promotion by butylated hydroxytoluene hydroperoxide: expanded role for electrophiles in multistage carcinogenesis.  Free radical derivatives of peroxides, hydroperoxides, and anthrones are thought to mediate tumor promotion by these compounds.  Further, the promoting activity of phorbol esters is attributed, in part, to their ability to stimulate the cellular generation of oxygen radicals.  A hydroperoxide metabolite of butylated hydroxytoluene, 2,6-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroperoxyl-4-methyl-2,5-cyclohexadienone (BHTOOH), has previously been shown to be a tumor promoter in mouse skin.  BHTOOH is extensively metabolized by murine keratinocytes to several radical species.  The primary radical generated from BHTOOH is a phenoxyl radical that can disproportionate to form butylated hydroxytoluene quinone methide, a reactive electrophile.  Since electrophilic species have not been previously postulated to mediate tumor promotion, the present study was undertaken to examine the role of this electrophile in the promoting activity of BHTOOH.  The biological activities of two chemical analogs of BHTOOH, 4-trideuteromethyl-BHTOOH and 4-tert-butyl-BHTOOH, were compared with that of the parent compound.  4-Trideuteromethyl-BHTOOH and 4-tert-butyl-BHTOOH have a reduced ability or inability, respectively, to form a quinone methide; however, like the parent compound, they both generate a phenoxyl radical when incubated with keratinocyte cytosol.  The potency of BHTOOH, 4-trideuteromethyl-BHTOOH, and 4-tert-butyl-BHTOOH as inducers of ornithine decarboxylase, a marker of tumor promotion, was commensurate with their capacity for generating butylated hydroxytoluene quinone methide.  These initial results were confirmed in a two-stage tumor promotion protocol in female SENCAR mice.  Together, these data indicate that a quinone methide is mediating tumor promotion by BHTOOH, providing direct evidence that an electrophilic intermediate can elicit this stage of carcinogenesis.
Survival after groin dissection for malignant melanoma.  Groin dissection was performed in 158 patients with malignant melanoma (superficial dissection, 76 patients; radical dissection, 82 patients).  Of 63 patients with palpable nodes, 57 patients (90%) had histologic involvement.  Of 93 patients with nonpalpable nodes, 31 patients (33%) had histologically positive nodes.  The 5-year survival rate for patients with histologically negative nodes (n = 69) was 77%; the 5-year survival rate for patients with histologically positive nodes (n = 89) was 43%.  The respective 5-year disease-free survival rates were 72% and 34%.  Of 57 patients with palpable, positive inguinal nodes, 21 patients (37%) had involvement of the deep nodes.  Of 31 patients with nonpalpable, histologic involvement of the inguinal nodes, six patients (19%) had or developed involvement of the deep nodes.  One of two patients with uncertain clinical status of the nodes preoperatively had positive deep nodes.  In prophylactic node dissection, frozen section of the inguinal group of the nodes does not provide a reliable method, because of sampling errors, in determining microscopic involvement of the nodes and in deciding whether a superficial or radical groin dissection is to be done.  For patients with positive nodes the 5-year survival rate was 48% when only the inguinal group was involved and was 28% when both inguinal and deep nodes were involved; the respective 5-year disease-free survival rates were 39% and 20%.  Survival after therapeutic groin dissection may partly depend on the thoroughness of the procedure.  Patients who have positive, deep nodes and who are undergoing an incontinuity dissection of the inguinal, iliac, and obturator nodes have an appreciable 5-year survival rate.
The role of resection in the management of melanoma metastatic to the adrenal gland.  Melanoma metastatic to the adrenal gland diagnosed before death was exceedingly rare before the development of computed tomographic (CT) scanning.  The records of 28 patients with melanoma metastatic to the adrenal gland seen since 1975 were reviewed.  Eighteen patients were men and 10 were women.  Twenty-three patients had unilateral disease.  Four patients were diagnosed only at autopsy, leaving 24 for analysis of treatment and survival.  Twenty-one patients had received specific active immunotherapy, four had received chemotherapy (dacarbazine, lomustin, bleomycin, and vincristine), and three had received both before the diagnosis of their adrenal disease.  Adrenal metastases were diagnosed by CT scanning in 14 patients with symptoms, 10 (91%) of whom had pain.  Ten patients were diagnosed by CT before entry into a chemotherapy protocol.  Of eight patients who underwent resection of all known disease, five underwent unilateral adrenalectomy, two underwent unilateral adrenalectomy and bowel resection, and one underwent bilateral adrenalectomy.  Two patients underwent partial resection of large unilateral tumors.  Fourteen patients with adrenal metastases and disease elsewhere were initiated or continued with chemotherapy or were treated symptomatically.  Mean survival in the group that underwent resection for cure was 59 months (3 to 112 months), whereas survival in the group with unresectable tumors was 15 months (1.5 to 132 months).  Four of eight patients who underwent resection for cure lived more than 5 years after detection of adrenal metastasis, whereas in only one of 14 patients with unresectable tumors was the same true.  Patients with metastatic melanoma localized to one or both adrenal glands may benefit from early detection and surgical intervention.
Evaluation of preoperative computed tomography in gastric malignancy.  Ninety patients with gastric malignancy underwent computed tomography (CT) before surgery.  The CT findings regarding neoplastic invasion of adjacent organs and metastasis or enlarged lymph nodes were compared with the findings at laparotomy (85 cases) or autopsy (5 cases), thus permitting evaluation of the diagnostic accuracy of CT and its usefulness for predicting resectability.  When present, neoplastic invasion of adjacent organs was overestimated or underestimated by CT in 21 cases.  Invasion of adjacent organs according to CT was false positive in 17 cases and false negative in 11 cases.  When liver metastasis or enlarged regional or distant lymph nodes were present, CT overestimated or underestimated their extent in 17 cases, and the diagnosis was false positive in one case and false negative in 33 cases.  The positive and negative predictive values of CT concerning resectability of the tumor were 81% and 64%, respectively.  Routine preoperative CT in gastric malignancy is concluded to be of limited value and surgical exploration, when feasible, remains the method of choice.
A hepatoblastoma originating in the caudate lobe radically resected with the inferior vena cava.  Complete resection of a rare hepatoblastoma in the caudate lobe, involving the inferior vena cava (IVC), is reported.  After systemic chemotherapy, a 5-year-old child underwent exploratory laparotomy at another hospital, but resection was not attempted because the tumor in the caudate lobe had extensively invaded the retrohepatic IVC.  However, because not only the lack of distant metastases but also the establishment of extrahepatic collaterals were confirmed by imaging, we thought it was possible to radically resect the tumor.  We successfully performed an extended left hepatic lobectomy including total excision of the caudate lobe and the involved portion of the IVC.  Although we did not reconstruct the IVC, no clinical manifestations arising from caval congestion were seen.  The serum alpha-fetoprotein value declined below the normal limit.  Our experience with this case has introduced a radical resectability for hepatic malignancy in the caudate lobe, even if it has extended into the IVC.
Partial and total penectomy for cancer.  Squamous carcinoma of the penis remains an uncommon tumor in the United States.  In the properly selected patient, partial or total penectomy performed with an understanding of the salient surgical anatomy results in adequate local control of these cancers with excellent functional and cosmetic results.
Primary hepatic carcinoid tumor. An electron microscopic and immunohistochemical study.  A case of primary carcinoid tumor of the liver with striking morphologic and electron microscopic features is reported.  Conventional histologic examination showed a prominent paranuclear clear zone in numerous tumor cells.  By electron microscopic examination, this clear zone corresponded to a paranuclear mass of intermediate filaments admixed with neurosecretory granules and other cytoplasmic organelles.
Secretin provocation test in the diagnosis of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.  The secretin stimulation test has become the preferred provocative test in suspected cases of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.  A pure secretin preparation, a gastrin-specific radioimmunoassay, and an appropriate sampling sequence are important for the proper interpretation of this test.  Gastric acid analysis is necessary in the assessment of hypergastrinemia to confirm acid hypersecretion and exclude achlorhydria.  When properly performed and interpreted, the secretin provocation test offers a safe, expeditious, and reliable means of evaluating patients with hypergastrinemia.
DNA flow cytometry of colorectal carcinoma: correlation of DNA stemlines with other prognostic indices.  DNA flow cytometry (FCM) was performed on paraffin-embedded tissue blocks of 38 surgically resected colorectal carcinomas (CRC).  Forty-seven percent of tumors exhibited aneuploidy and 53% were diploid.  Seventy-two percent of patients in the aneuploid but only 35% in the diploid group were alive after a mean follow-up of 30.7 and 28.8 months (p = 0.01), and 5-yr survival of 56.7% and 11.7%, respectively (p less than 0.05).  The site of tumor location, Dukes' stage, and serum CEA level did not predict a certain DNA stemline.  However, irrespective of the ploidy pattern, a serum CEA level greater than 5.0 was associated with a higher mortality and poor 5-yr survival (p less than 0.005).  Similarly, advanced Dukes' stage was associated with higher mortality (p less than 0.05).  Forty-six percent of the patients with lesions that were Dukes' B2 or advanced stage received adjuvant therapy.  Eighty-five percent of this subgroup of patients died; 18% of these patients had aneuploid tumors.  The role of FCM in the assessment of prognosis of CRC deserves further clinical evaluation in a randomized control trial.
Magnetic resonance imaging of small hepatocellular carcinoma.  Thirty-eight patients with small hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs), size less than 20 mm, initially detected by ultrasound (US) and histologically confirmed, were examined by magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, computed tomographic (CT) scan, and angiography.  MR imaging demonstrated HCC nodules in nine (75.0%) of 12 patients with tumors less than 10 mm in diameter and in 22 (84.6%) of 26 patients with tumors 10-20 mm in diameter.  In total, HCC nodules were detected in 31 of 38 patients (81.6%) by MR imaging.  On the other hand, HCC lesions were found on CT scan in 14 of 26 patients (53.8%) and in 27 of 35 patients (77.1%) by angiography.  With MR imaging, HCC nodules were demonstrated in 21 of 31 patients on both T1 and T2 weighted images, and 13 of 21 patients (61.9%) were shown to have low intensity areas or iso intensity areas on T1 weighted image, whereas the other eight patients (38.1%) were shown to have high intensity areas.  All 21 patients were shown to have high intensity areas on T2 weighted image.  Among 15 resected cases, four patients had a high intensity area on T1 weighted image, and a significant fatty change was noted in HCC nodules by histological study of the resected specimen.  We suggest that MR imaging is a useful diagnostic imaging modality, even in small HCC of less than 20 mm.
Intrahepatic lymphatics opacified during hepatic arteriography in a patient with hepatocellular carcinoma.  Extrahepatic lymph node metastases are not uncommon in advanced cases of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).  This is the account of a HCC case in which intrahepatic lymphatics running toward the hepatic hilus were clearly opacified during hepatic arteriography.  The patient was treated by hepatic artery embolization followed by selective embolization of the portal branches, but lymph node metastases at the hepatic hilus were later found during follow-up.  The clinical course of this case suggests that the communication between the tumor and the lymphatics was responsible for the lymph node metastasis.
Inflammatory pseudotumor of the liver associated with acute myelomonocytic leukemia.  A patient with inflammatory pseudotumor of the liver associated with acute myelomonocytic leukemia (M4) is reported.  He had spiking fever, epigastralgia, and elevated levels of serum C-reactive protein (CRP) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP).  Ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic mass in the liver, and ultrasonically guided fine needle aspiration biopsy of the mass revealed that it was composed of fibrous connective tissue infiltrated with plasma cells, eosinophils, and neutrophils.  Accordingly, a diagnosis of inflammatory pseudotumor of the liver was made.  Marked reduction in the size of the lesion and a decrease of the levels of the CRP and ALP occurred without specific treatment.  We emphasize the importance of ultrasonically guided aspiration biopsy in diagnosis of inflammatory pseudotumor of the liver without the need for surgery.
Endodermal sinus tumor of the ovary during pregnancy: a case report.  Serum alpha-fetoprotein screening led to the detection of an endodermal sinus tumor of the ovary in a 24-year-old female in week 17 of pregnancy.  After surgery, chemotherapy was postponed.  In week 28 levels of serum alpha-fetoprotein increased, but delivery was delayed until 33 weeks' gestation.  After delivery, the patient received four chemotherapy courses (cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin).  Mother (24 months after last chemotherapy) and child are doing well.
Laparoscopic pelvic lymphadenectomy in the staging of early carcinoma of the cervix.  Laparoscopic pelvic lymphadenectomy was performed in 39 patients.  An incision of the peritoneum between the round and infundibulo-pelvic ligament on each side gave access to the retroperitoneal space.  Subsequently, laparoscopic surgery allowed precise dissection of external and internal iliac vessels, umbilical artery, and obturator nerve.  The peritoneum was left open, and the lymph was drained into the peritoneal cavity.  No lymphocele was observed.  Three to 22 (mean, 8.7) nodes were removed, and there was no significant morbidity.  Sensitivity and specificity were 100% in this preliminary experience.  It is thus possible to remove the first-line regional lymph nodes of the cervix for pathologic examination.  Because "skip" metastases are quite rare in early cervical carcinoma, the risk of missing a positive node is low.  Brachytherapy alone, vaginal surgery, or, in microinvasive carcinoma, conization alone can be applied safely without the need of a staging laparotomy in cases with negative nodes.
The value of squamous cell carcinoma antigen in patients with locally advanced cervical cancer undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy.  Serum levels of squamous cell carcinoma antigen were measured in 688 samples from 119 patients with cervical cancer.  Ninety-seven patients had primary tumors and 22 had recurrent disease.  Serum samples were obtained before each cycle of chemotherapy, before surgery, at least 4 weeks after surgery, and at 2- to 3-month intervals during follow-up from 78 of the patients with locally advanced cervical cancer who were receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy.  Squamous cell carcinoma antigen serum levels were elevated (greater than 2.5 ng/ml) in 71% of the patients with primary tumors and in 77% of the patients with recurrent carcinomas.  The percentage of positivity increased significantly with stage (p = 0.03) and was higher in squamous cell tumors than in adenocarcinomas (p less than 0.001).  Pretreatment squamous cell carcinoma antigen levels were not predictive of neoadjuvant chemotherapy response; however, the serial measurement during chemotherapy showed a good correlation with clinical response.  In the patients who had surgery, squamous cell carcinoma antigen positivity did not correlate to pathologic findings (lymph node status, cervical and parametrial infiltration).  Disease-free survival was significantly longer in patients with squamous cell carcinoma antigen pretreatment values that were lower than 5 ng/ml, compared with patients with marker higher than 5 ng/ml (p less than 0.01).  Abnormal squamous cell carcinoma antigen serum levels preceded the clinical detection of recurrence in eight of 11 patients with a median lead time of 5 months.
Epidermal growth factor receptor expression in normal ovarian epithelium and ovarian cancer. I. Correlation of receptor expression with prognostic factors in patients with ovarian cancer.  Previous studies in breast and bladder cancer have suggested that epidermal growth factor receptor is expressed by only a proportion of cancers and is associated with poor clinical outcome.  We used a monoclonal antibody specifically reactive with the extracellular domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor to localize this receptor immunohistochemically in frozen sections of normal ovary and epithelial ovarian cancer.  Normal ovarian epithelium was found to express epidermal growth factor receptor in all cases.  Among 87 ovarian cancers, however, 23% did not express immunohistochemically detectable receptor.  Epidermal growth factor receptor expression was not related to histologic grade or stage, but was associated with poor survival (p less than 0.05).  The median length of survival of patients with tumors that did not express epidermal growth factor receptor was 40 months compared with 26 months in patients with tumors that did express epidermal growth factor receptor.  As in breast and bladder cancer, expression of epidermal growth factor receptor in ovarian cancer appears to be a poor prognostic factor.
Detection of loss of heterozygosity in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor specimens by the polymerase chain reaction.  A polymerase chain reaction-based procedure was used for the detection of DNA length polymorphisms generated by naturally occurring genetic deletions or insertions of known sequence.  This method consists of a simple one-step assay that does not require any restriction enzyme analysis or Southern blot hybridization, allowing identification in ethidium bromide-stained gels.  The procedure described here was used to detect loss of heterozygosity at various loci, including the Hbb beta-globin gene cluster, in chemically induced mouse skin tumors, using a variety of tissue preparations, including microdissection of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens, short-term cultures, and fluorescence-activated cell sorting of epithelial populations.  This approach may be useful in detecting tumor-specific reduction to homozygosity at polymorphic chromosomal loci, allowing the mapping of putative tumor-suppressor loci involved in carcinogenesis.
Characterization of preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions in the rat pancreas.  Nodules of acinar cells with increased proliferative potential develop in the pancreas of carcinogen-treated rats and in untreated aged rats.  Large nodules are classed as adenomas.  Phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of nodule cells were compared with normal pancreas and transplantable acinar cell carcinomas by several methods.  Nuclei of acinar cells from normal pancreas, adenomas, and three carcinomas in situ had normal diploid DNA content as determined by flow cytometry.  One of two primary carcinomas had a hypodiploid DNA content.  Two of three transplantable carcinomas were aneuploid with a DNA content in the tetraploid range.  Explants from nodules and adenomas failed to grow in soft agar, whereas several carcinomas were positive in this assay.  A primary carcinoma was serially transplanted, but transplantation of nodules or adenomas failed.  Transfection of DNA from carcinomas in situ yielded a higher frequency of NIH 3T3 transformants than DNA from adenomas.  DNAs from the transformants did not contain ras sequences.  These studies indicate that cells from nodules and adenomas have low growth potential and lack critical phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of transformed malignant cells that were present in some primary and transplanted carcinomas.
Induction of different morphologic features of malignant melanoma and pigmented lesions after transformation of murine melanocytes with bFGF-cDNA and H-ras, myc, neu, and E1a oncogenes.  Malignant melanomas show a remarkable degree of heterogeneity because of different morphologic features, biologic behavior, and prognosis.  In this communication, the authors attempted to correlate morphologic heterogeneity of melanomas with transformation by different activated oncogenes; they studied the histologic features of melanocytic lesions induced by murine melanocytes transformed by basic fibroblast growth factor (b-FGF-cDNA) or H-ras, neu, myc, and E1a oncogenes, and the lesions were compared with those observed in human pathology.  Tumors formed after grafting onto syngenic mice or subcutaneous injections in nude mice were studied.  In syngenic mice, benign melanocytic lesions reminiscent of intradermal nevus were observed with melanocytes transformed with b-FGF-cDNA, and myc and E1a oncogenes.  Benign lesions were also formed by neu-transformed melanocytes when they were grafted concomitantly with keratinocytes, whereas malignant tumors were formed by the same cells when grafted alone or together with fibroblasts.  In contrast, H-ras melanocytes always formed malignant tumors.  In nude mice, b-FGF-transformed melanocytes induced benign lesions, whereas transformed melanocytes by the other oncogenes formed malignant tumors with distinctive and homogeneous morphologic features that depended on the transforming oncogene.  Melanomas with either epithelioid cell, spindle cell, small round cell, and anaplastic cell growth patterns could be distinguished after transformation with H-ras, neu, E1a, and myc oncogenes, respectively.  These various histologic types are analogous to those that may be observed in human melanomas, even within the same tumor.  These studies suggest a possible molecular mechanism for tumor heterogeneity in which distinct oncogenes or oncogenelike activities can be activated in different tumors or discrete parts of the same tumor.
Treatment of angiomas with sclerosing injection of hydroxypolyethoxydodecan.  The authors discuss the indications for hydroxypolyethoxydodecan in the sclerosing treatment of angiomas, with particular reference to cavernous, venous, and evolutive angiomas (ie, immature angiomas that fail to involute by eight to ten months).  Moreover, the sclerosing agent may be employed, in connection with embolization and subsequent surgery, in arteriovenous angiomas with a relevant cutaneous-subcutaneous development.  The authors have successfully used the "interstitial" sclerosing technique, according to Andrews' method.  This technique involves interstitial injections to obtain the sclerosis of the thin threads of fibrous tissue stroma between the blood vessels.  The sclerosing therapy may cause the complete regression of "low flow" angiomas or, at least, a partial reduction that simplifies the ensuing surgical excision.  In the case of partial regression of the angioma obtained with the sclerosing therapy, the surgery of the remaining angioma causes a lesser degree of bleeding (especially in areas that do not particularly lend themselves to surgical exploration, ie, the oral cavity); an increased reliability in the radicality of the intervention (due also to the reduced size of the lesion); and better results from an aesthetic-functional point of view.
Intraoperative pancreatic fine needle aspiration biopsy. Results in 166 patients.  Intraoperative fine needle aspiration biopsy (NAB) of undiagnosed pancreatic masses was studied in 166 patients over a 17-year period.  The cytologic diagnoses were correlated with histologic specimens, autopsy results, or clinical follow-up (benign disease was documented if the patient was alive without malignancy at least 2 years after laparotomy).  Aspirates were interpreted as benign, suspicious, malignant, or unsatisfactory.  Malignant disease was the final diagnosis in 109 patients; the cytology was concordant in 101 and was interpreted as suspicious in four.  Four patients with benign cytology later proved to have malignant disease--a false-negative rate of 2.5 per cent.  A total of 57 patients had benign disease; 51 of these had benign cytology.  The remaining patients had "unsatisfactory" cytology reports.  A 93 per cent sensitivity, 100 per cent specificity, and 0 per cent complication rate are reported.  There were no false-positive cytology reports.  Complications are rare and represent case reports, thus, additional sampling is at minimal risk.  Intraoperative pancreatic NAB is a safe, easy, more accurate biopsy technique than historical wedge or core needle biopsies.  It is the biopsy method of choice for pancreatic masses found at laparotomy.
Surgical voice restoration with the Blom-Singer prosthesis following laryngopharyngoesophagectomy and pharyngogastric anastomosis.  Surgical voice restoration using the Blom-Singer technique is a well-established procedure in patients who have undergone simple laryngectomy.  Operations for hypopharyngeal carcinoma are more extensive and require reconstruction using regional skin or myocutaneous flaps, or reanastomosis with colon, jejunum, or stomach.  We report the use of the Blom-Singer prosthesis in four patients who had undergone pharyngogastric repair following laryngopharyngoesophagectomy and who had failed to achieve a satisfactory voice.  All patients initially developed good speech using the prosthesis.  Two patients subsequently had their prostheses removed: one because of recurrent malignant disease and one because the procedure had not significantly altered the quality of the voice.  The remaining two patients have continued to use the device at 2 and 5 years after insertion with good voice production.
Selenium in forage crops and cancer mortality in U.S. counties.  The potential protective effect of selenium status on the risk of developing cancer has been examined in animal and epidemiologic studies.  This ecological study investigated the association between U.S.  county forage selenium status and site- and sex-specific county cancer mortality rates (1950-1969) using weighted least squares regression.  Consistent, significant (p less than .01) inverse associations were observed for cancers of the lung, rectum, bladder, esophagus, and cervix in a model limited to rural counties and for cancers of the lung, breast, rectum, bladder, esophagus, and corpus uteri in a model of all counties.  No consistent significant positive associations were observed in the rural county models.  This remarkable degree of consistency for the inverse associations strengthens the likelihood of a causal relationship between low selenium status and an increased risk of cancer mortality.
Rapid analysis of carcinoembryonic antigen levels in gallbladder bile. Identification of patients at high risk of colorectal liver metastasis   Recently it was found that immunoanalysis of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels in gallbladder bile may be a sensitive method to detect colorectal liver metastases in humans.  Methods used in the past for the detection of CEA in various body fluids were cumbersome and time consuming, requiring acid extraction, extensive dialysis, and column purification.  Single-step, solid-phase radioimmunoassays, designed specifically for serum CEA analysis, were developed commercially to replace these methods.  Parameters and methodology necessary to adapt these kits for Parameters and methodology necessary to adapt these kits for use with gallbladder bile are presented here.  A combination of pretreatment procedures for bile, before radioimmunoassay, permit rapid, reproducible, and accurate measurement of CEA levels in gallbladder bile.
Liver transplantation for hepatoblastoma. The American experience.  The current role of liver transplantation in treating malignant tumors of the liver is uncertain, except for select histologic types.  Pooled data on the results of liver transplantation in 12 children with hepatoblastoma is presented here.  One half of the children are alive 24 to 70 (44 +/- 19) months after transplantation with no evidence of recurrence.  Three patients (25%) died of tumor recurrence and three (25%) died of other causes.  Unifocal and intrahepatic tumors were associated with better prognosis compared to the multifocal tumors and tumors with extrahepatic spread (p = 0.04 and 0.13).  Microscopically vascular invasion and the predominance of embryonal and/or anaplastic epithelium were associated with a poor prognosis compared to the tumors with no vascular invasion and with predominantly fetal epithelium (p = 0.08 and 0.1).  It is concluded that continued efforts to treat unresectable hepatoblastomas by liver transplantation is justified and the role of adjuvant chemotherapy in improving the results needs to be better defined.
A population-based study of functional status and social support networks of elderly patients newly diagnosed with cancer.  We assessed the functional status and social support networks of 799 men and women aged 65 years or older newly diagnosed with cancer and living in six New Mexico counties.  Functional limitations included depending on others for transportation (33%) and mental incompetence or poor recent memory (42%).  The percentage of patients with functional limitation increased sharply with increasing age.  In a substantial number of patients there was also evidence for poor social support networks; 26.5% of subjects lived alone and 38.9% had no children living in the vicinity.  In a multiple logistic regression analysis, the predictors of having a poor social support network included non-Hispanic white ethnicity, advanced age, low income, and being a recent migrant to the area.  Subjects with functional limitations were more likely to have poor social support networks than subjects without such limitations.  The deleterious combination of impaired functional status and a limited social support network may explain why elderly cancer patients are at increased risk for not receiving appropriate therapy.  Given the potential complexities involving the evaluation and appropriate treatment of cancer, care must be taken to adequately assess functional status and support mechanisms of older patients, and to provide adequate support to ensure compliance with treatment.
Recurrent pigmented melanocytic nevus. A benign lesion, not to be mistaken for malignant melanoma.  Melanocytic nevi that recur after incomplete removal are pigmented lesions that may clinically and pathologically simulate malignant melanoma in situ.  Five examples of recurrent pigmented melanocytic nevus, with emphasis on light microscopic and immunohistochemical findings, are reported herein.  Prominent HMB-45 staining in these nevi may cause further confusion in differentiating them from malignant melanoma.  The differential diagnosis of recurrent pigmented melanocytic nevi is discussed, with particular emphasis on distinguishing these lesions from malignant melanoma.  Our immunohistochemical observations indicate that the recurrences most likely develop as a result of proliferation of melanocytes remaining in the epidermis and/or adnexae following incomplete removal.  The approach and management of recurrent nevi are also discussed.
Secretory carcinoma of the breast.  Most studies of secretory carcinoma of the breast have been single case reports or separate analyses of the problem in either children or adults.  We studied 10 female patients, aged 5 to 87 years.  Most patients presented with a palpable mass, often near the areola.  Five of six tumors were estrogen receptor negative; three analyzed for progesterone receptor were positive.  Histologic patterns present in varying proportions were "classic" secretory carcinoma with microacini, abundant secretion with papillary features, and with prominent solid and papillary apocrine features.  The tumors had strong reactivity for alpha-lactalbumin, S100, and carcinoembryonic antigen (polyclonal) and were negative for gross cystic disease fluid protein and anti-carcinoembryonic antigen (monoclonal).  Six patients had mastectomy; four had local excision; none had axillary nodal metastases initially.  With follow-up of 3 to 72 months (mean, 47 months; median, 48 months), two patients treated by local excision had local recurrences, one patient had axillary nodal metastases.  All patients are alive.  Comparison of patients under and over 30 years of age revealed one important difference: younger patients had a longer interval between detection and biopsy-30 vs 2 months.  Treatment recommendations are initial wide excision or quadrantectomy with low axillary dissection in most cases and, in premenarchal patients, strong effort to preserve the breast bud without jeopardizing local control.
Intraluminal crystalloids in struma ovarii. Immunohistochemical, DNA flow cytometric, and ultrastructural study.  We recently encountered a unique case of follicular variant of papillary carcinoma arising in struma ovarii that contained numerous intrafollicular crystalloids.  There was no evidence of capsular or vascular invasion or metastases, though the DNA content of the papillary carcinoma was aneuploid.  In contrast, diploid DNA was manifested in the histologically benign thyroid tissue.  The nature of the crystalloids and the significance of aneuploid DNA content are discussed.
The tall cell variant of papillary carcinoma of the thyroid gland. Comparison with the common form of papillary carcinoma by DNA and morphometric analysis.  The tall cell variant of papillary carcinoma of the thyroid manifests a more aggressive behavior than the usual form of papillary carcinoma of the thyroid.  Morphometric analysis of nuclear features and DNA analysis may yield information predictive of aggressive behavior.  Accordingly, the DNA content and morphometric features of the neoplastic cells of the tall cell variant were measured and compared with measurements obtained from neoplastic cells of the usual form of papillary carcinoma.  Six of the 11 tall cell neoplasms were aneuploid, as were four of the eight usual papillary neoplasms.  Although benign cells were separated from malignant cells in each case, differences between tall and usual papillary carcinoma cells were not observed regarding DNA content, chromatin texture, or nuclear size and shape.  Differences in the clinical behavior of these neoplasms will likely need to be explained on the basis of other characteristics.
Squamous cell carcinoma in situ arising in an ovarian mature cystic teratoma. Report of one case with histopathologic, cytogenetic, and flow cytometric DNA content analysis.  A squamous cell carcinoma in situ arose in an ovarian mature teratoma (ie, dermoid cyst) in a 62-year-old woman.  Flow cytometric DNA content analysis of paraffin-embedded in situ carcinoma showed a normal DNA content with moderate to high proliferative activity (S-phase fraction estimate, 16% to 18%).  Cytogenetic analysis of the in situ cancer and the benign cystic portion of the tumor revealed a 46,XX karyotype.  In addition, the benign cystic portion of the tumor revealed homozygous chromosomal heteromorphisms, compared with heterozygous markers found in peripheral blood lymphocytes.  These results show that this squamous cell carcinoma in situ was euploid and suggest that the mature cystic teratoma was derived from a single germ cell after meiosis I.
Extramammary Paget's disease of the bronchial epithelium.  We report the first case, to our knowledge, of extramammary Paget's disease of the bronchial epithelium.  The tumor displayed Paget's cells scattered within the bronchial epithelium in most of the lesion, but infiltrating into the bronchial submucosa and pulmonary parenchyma with microglandular and papillary patterns in some area.  In addition to the histologic findings of coexistence with adenocarcinomatous components, in situ involvement into bronchial glands and ducts by Paget's cells was observed, suggesting that extramammary Paget's disease of the bronchial epithelium may be a variant of pulmonary adenocarcinoma, which is associated with bronchial glands.
An adult with common acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (C-ALL) presenting with skin infiltration.  A 22-year-old man presented with multiple raised erythematous skin lesions, pyrexia and epistaxis.  A diagnosis of common acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (C-ALL) was made by morphological, cytochemical, immunological and cytogenetic examination of peripheral blood and bone marrow.  Biopsy of the skin revealed leukaemic infiltration by similar cells.
Monoclonal antibody-purged autologous bone marrow transplantation therapy for multiple myeloma.  Eleven patients with plasma cell dyscrasias underwent high-dose chemoradiotherapy and anti-B-cell monoclonal antibody (MoAb)-treated autologous bone marrow transplantation (ABMT).  The majority of patients had advanced Durie-Salmon stage myeloma at diagnosis, all were pretreated with chemotherapy, and six had received prior radiotherapy.  At the time of ABMT, all patients demonstrated good performance status with Karnofsky score of 80% or greater and had less than 10% marrow tumor cells.  Eight patients had residual monoclonal marrow plasma cells and 10 patients had paraprotein.  Following high-dose melphalan and total body irradiation (TBI) there were seven complete responses, three partial responses, and one toxic death.  Granulocytes greater than 500/mm3 were noted at a median of 21 (range 12 to 46) days posttransplant (PT) and untransfused platelets greater than 20,000/mm3 were noted at a median of 23 (12 to 53) days PT in 10 of the 11 patients.  Natural killer cells and cytotoxic/suppressor T cells predominated early PT, with return of B cells at 3 months PT and normalization of T4:T8 ratio at 1 year PT.  Less than 5% polyclonal marrow plasma cells were noted in all patients after transplant.  Three of the seven complete responders have had return of paraprotein, two with myeloma, and have subsequently responded to alpha 2 interferon therapy.  Eight patients are alive at 18.9 (8.9 to 43.1) months PT and four remain disease-free at 12.3, 17.5, 18.9, and 29 months PT.  This preliminary study confirms that high-dose melphalan and TBI can achieve high response rates without unexpected toxicity in patients who have sensitive disease, and that MoAb-based purging techniques do not inhibit engraftment.  Although the follow-up is short- and long-term outcome to be determined, relapses post-ABMT in these heavily pretreated patients suggest that ABMT or alternative treatment strategies should be evaluated earlier in the disease course.
The beta globin 3' enhancer element confers regulated expression on the human gamma globin gene in the human embryonic-fetal erythroleukemia cell line K562.  We have constructed fusion genes comprised of gamma and beta globin elements and globin sequences linked to neomycin resistance (neoR) genes to define the cis acting sequences responsible for developmental stage-specific expression and induction of fetal globin genes in embryonic-fetal erythroleukemia K562 cells.  The results indicate that the gamma promoter is required for proper initiation of transcription.  However, the accumulation of gamma globin transcripts in response to hemin induction requires the additional presence of either gamma intervening sequence 2 or the 3' enhancer element of the beta globin gene.  Thus, the gamma promoter may provide the elements for developmental stage-specific gene expression during fetal life.  By contrast, the beta 3' enhancer is erythroid-specific but not developmental stage- or gene-specific.
Detection of residual leukemia after bone marrow transplant for chronic myeloid leukemia: role of polymerase chain reaction in predicting relapse.  We used the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect residual leukemia-specific mRNA in blood and marrow from 37 patients in complete hematologic and cytogenetic remission after allogeneic bone marrow transplant (BMT) for chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).  Our two-step PCR method involved the use of "nested primers" in the second step and could detect one K562 cell diluted into 10(5) normal cells.  Elaborate measures were taken to exclude false-positive and false-negative results.  In nine patients whose blood and marrow were studied simultaneously the results were concordant (two positive and seven negative).  Twenty-three patients transplanted in chronic phase (CP) with unmanipulated donor marrow were studied.  Blood cells from nine of these patients were studied 3 to 6 months post-BMT and six were PCR positive; three were negative on subsequent studies.  Blood cells from 18 patients studied between 8 months and 8 years post-BMT were all PCR negative.  Nine patients transplanted in CP with T-cell-depleted marrow cells were studied.  Blood from five was positive 3 to 24 months post-BMT; blood from five was negative 3 to 6 years post-BMT.  Four patients no longer in first CP were studied after BMT with unmanipulated donor marrow.  Blood from all four was positive 5 to 19 months post-BMT.  Based on the known clinical results of transplant in these three cohorts we conclude that PCR may be positive within 6 months of BMT in patients who can expect long-lasting remission, whereas PCR positivity later after BMT may indicate that the probability of cure is reduced.  Thus, the technique may prove useful for early assessment of new transplant protocols that might inadvertently increase the risk of relapse.
The reliability of palpation in the assessment of tumours.  There is now a joint UICC-AJC classification for cervical lymph nodes based mainly on the size of the nodes.  There is a recognized error in palpation, not only for detecting the presence of tumour but also its size.  This study used an animal tumour model system to compare the ability of 6 independent observers of varying experience to detect and stage superficially transplanted growths.  A preclinical medical student was as good as a Consultant ENT Surgeon in predicting the presence of tumour but the ability to stage tumours accurately was related to experience.  Whilst the most experienced observers accurately estimated the size of tumours less than 2 cm, they were less accurate for larger (greater than 2 cm) tumours which were constantly understaged.  This phenomenon may have important clinical implications particularly related to current nodal staging criteria.
Epidemiology of primary osteogenic sarcoma in the San Francisco Bay Area of California.  This epidemiologic study represents an analysis of all registered new cases of osteogenic sarcoma (OGS) during the 14-year period from January 1973 to December 1986 in five San Francisco Bay counties.  Inclusion into the study was limited to patients who were diagnosed in the first three decades of life and who were residents within the Bay Area at the time of diagnosis.  To determine epidemiologic characteristics of OGS, records on 96 patients from the Bay Area Resources for Cancer Control with histologically proven OGS were reviewed.  The incidence of OGS was influenced by age, gender, and race, but none of the effects were statistically significant.  A geographic variation in the incidence of OGS was discovered, although it was not statistically significant.  The results are presented in support of a continued search for environmental variables that may someday reveal the etiologic factors of OGS.
Solitary fibromatosis of bone. A rare variant of congenital generalized fibromatosis.  Congenital generalized fibromatosis is part of the spectrum of the fibromatoses of infancy and childhood.  The lesions are usually multiple and fibrous in nature.  They may appear in virtually every organ outside the central nervous system.  Congenital generalized fibromatosis can be limited to the skeleton and rarely manifests itself as a solitary bone lesion.  Solitary osseous lesions often behave differently than multiple osseous lesions.  Solitary lesions often do not regress without treatment and can have a high incidence of recurrence with less than marginal excision.  Multiple osseous lesions often regress without treatment.
Assessment of "squamous cell carcinoma antigen" (SCC) as a marker of epidermoid carcinoma of the anal canal.  We measured squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC) in epidermoid carcinoma of the anal canal in 66 patients.  Samples were taken at diagnosis, before treatment, and during follow-up; 353 samples were analyzed.  The positive threshold was taken as 2 ng/ml.  At diagnosis, the sensitivity of the marker was 44 percent and its specificity 92 percent.  In our series, the pretherapeutic level of SCC does not correlate with T as in Papillons' Clinical Staging System, but it does correlate with nodal invasion (P less than 0.05).  It is of no prognostic value at the time of diagnosis.  During follow-up, at relapse the level of SCC is 20.3 +/- 43 ng/ml.  This increase is significant (P less than 0.01): the sensitivity of the marker is 77 percent.  In patients who have relapsed, development of the illness correlates with the level of SCC, which is of prognostic value (P less than 0.01).  In conclusion, the level of SCC should be associated with the clinical follow-up of patients with epidermoid carcinoma of the anal canal.
Anti-tumor X anti-lymphocyte heteroconjugates augment colon tumor cell lysis in vitro and prevent tumor growth in vivo.  Cross-linking an anti-tumor antibody, specific for tumor cell surface antigens, and an anti-lymphocyte antibody, specific for the T lymphocyte receptor complex (TCR/CD3), produces a heteroconjugate that can direct T cells to lyse tumor cells.  We tested the ability of anti-tumor X anti-lymphocyte (CD3) heteroconjugates to redirect human peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) to lyse human colon cancer cells in cytotoxicity assays and in a murine colon tumor model.  We demonstrated in vitro, that cultured human PBLs alone produced low levels of tumor lysis, but PBLs treated with anti-tumor X anti-CD3 heteroconjugates produced significantly greater tumor cell lysis (P less than 0.0025).  Similarly, nude mice injected with LS174T human colon cancer cells and treated with cultured human PBLs and anti-tumor X anti-CD3 heteroconjugates survived significantly longer than saline control mice (P less than 0.01), or mice treated with PBLs alone (P less than 0.01), or heteroconjugates alone (P less than 0.05).  F(ab')2 heteroconjugates were equally as effective in prolonging animal survival, but irrelevant heteroconjugates and monoclonal anti-tumor antibodies showed no therapeutic benefit.  Anti-tumor X anti-CD3 heteroconjugates may represent an effective approach to tumor-specific cellular immunotherapy.
Polyamine levels in healthy and tumor tissues of patients with colon adenocarcinoma.  Tissue polyamine levels were determined in patients with colon adenocarcinoma to try to identify biochemical indicators able to characterize the growth and the metabolism of human solid tumors.  Polyamine content was determined in the tumor and in the "healthy" mucosa sampled at different distances within the resection edges.  For each patient the polyamine content in the tumor was compared with that in the mucosa.  The results demonstrated that the spermidine concentration was higher in the tumor than in the healthy mucosa; the differences were statistically significant.  However, spermine in the tumor increased to a lesser degree.  No statistically significant differences were observed among these mucosae at different localizations, but the spermine concentration in the mucosa after the tumor showed values very close to those of the neoplasia.
Isolation and characterization of normal and neoplastic colonic epithelial cell populations.  The aim of the present study was to characterize rat mucosal colonic cells harvested from the crypt continuum during differentiation and dimethylhydrazine-induced neoplasia.  The collection of colonocytes was performed using a modified nonenzymatic isolation procedure based on Ca2+ chelation and gentle mechanical dissociation.  Light and electron microscopy histomorphological examinations, [3H]thymidine incorporation studies, and activity gradients of alkaline phosphatase, thymidine kinase, and cytoskeleton-associated protein tyrosine kinase indicated that distinct cell populations were harvested from the various crypt regions in a temporal sequence mirroring their zonal and functional distribution in situ.  After dimethylhydrazine administration, marked protein tyrosine kinase activity was noted in colonic cells harvested from upper crypt zones.  The misplaced and sustained kinase activity preceded the actual polyp or tumor formation.  This observation is consistent with the expansion of colonic proliferative compartments beyond allowable boundaries during the preneoplastic period.  Companion studies in human colonic epithelial specimens corroborate the findings observed in normal and transformed murine colonocytes.  It is believed that the characterization and manipulation of colonocytes using our in vitro model will provide important clues to the molecular events underlying the differentiation program and carcinogenic process in the colonic cell.
A human CD5+ B cell clone that secretes an idiotype-specific high affinity IgM monoclonal antibody.  We previously demonstrated the occurrence of a naturally arisen human anti-idiotypic B cell clone, that we transformed with EBV (EBV383).  We show evidence that EBV383 not only expresses the CD5 surface Ag, but also contains the 2.7-kb mRNA transcript encoding this protein.  In addition, we show the presence of the 3.6-kb mRNA precursor.  Most Ig produced by CD5+ B cells are polyreactive natural IgM antibodies encoded by unmutated copies of germline VH genes.  However, in this study we present data demonstrating the monoreactive high affinity character of the anti-idiotypic antibody (mAb383) produced by EBV383.  These data are in agreement with our previous observations, showing that the VH chain of mAb383 is encoded by an extensive somatically mutated VHV gene in a way that is consistent with an Ag-driven immune response.  A possible role for this remarkable anti-idiotypic antibody in the maintenance of B cell memory is discussed.
MHC-restricted recognition of autologous melanoma by tumor-specific cytotoxic T cells. Evidence for restriction by a dominant HLA-A allele.  Autologous melanoma-specific CTL recognize a common tumor-associated Ag (TAA) in the context of HLA class I antigens.  We have demonstrated that HLA-A2 can be a restricting Ag and, in T cell lines homozygous for HLA-A2, that CTL can be generated by stimulation with HLA-A2 allogeneic melanomas.  In the current study, we have investigated T cell lines from patients who are heterozygous at HLA-A region locus, to determine the relative importance of each A-region allele in this MHC-restricted recognition of tumor.  We have shown that HLA-A1 can be a restricting Ag, and that allogeneic melanomas expressing HLA-A1 can substitute for the autologous tumor in the generation of HLA-A1-restricted CTL.  However, when T cell lines express both HLA-A1 and HLA-A2, the HLA-A2 allele governed restriction of the melanoma TAA.  Three autologous-stimulated HLA-A1, A2 CTL lines all demonstrated restriction by the HLA-A2 allele, when examined in cytotoxicity assays, cold-competition assays, and proliferation assays.  There was no evidence of restriction by the second HLA-allele, HLA-A1.  Although the autologous-stimulated CTL use a single A-region allele for tumor recognition, the autologous HLA-A1, A2 tumors are lysed by both HLA-A1-restricted and HLA-A2-restricted CTL.  The dominance of restricting alleles was further demonstrated when HLA-matched allogeneic melanomas were used as the stimulating tumor to generate tumor-specific CTL.  Stimulation of the heterozygous (HLA-A1, A2) lymphocytes with HLA-A2-matched allogeneic melanomas resulted in CTL specific for the autologous tumor, and restricted by the HLA-A2 Ag.  However, stimulation with an HLA-A1-matched allogeneic melanoma failed to induce tumor-specific CTL restricted by the HLA-A1 Ag.  The data suggest there is a dominance of HLA-A region Ag at the level of the T cell, such that only one is restricting in the recognition of the autologous melanoma.  At the level of the tumor, however, the TAA is expressed in the context of both HLA-A region alleles.  We can generate specific CTL from lymph node cells or PBL and HLA-A region matched allogeneic melanomas; however, because most patients are heterozygous at the HLA-A region locus, an understanding of the dominant restricting alleles must be obtained so that an appropriately matched allogeneic melanoma can be selected.
Cytotoxic T cell clones isolated from ovarian tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes recognize multiple antigenic epitopes on autologous tumor cells.  CTL clones were developed from tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) from the ascites of a patient with ovarian carcinoma by coculture of TIL with autologous tumor cells and subsequent cloning in the presence of autologous tumor cells.  These CTL clones expressed preferential cytolytic activity against autologous tumor cells but not against allogeneic ovarian tumor cells and the NK-sensitive cell line K562.  The cytolytic activity of these CTL against autologous tumors was inhibited by anti-TCR (WT31 mAb), anti-HLA class I, and anti-CD3 mAb but not by the NK function antibody Leu 11b.  Cloning of the autologous tumor cells in vitro revealed that the CTL clones of the ovarian TIL expressed differential abilities to lyse autologous tumor cell clones.  The specificity analysis of these autologous tumor specific CTL suggested that they recognize several antigenic determinants present on the ovarian tumor cells.  Our results indicate the presence of at least three antigenic epitopes on the tumor cells (designated OVA-1A, OVA-1B, and OVA-1C), one of which (OVA-1C) is unstable.  These determinants are present either simultaneously or separately, and six types of ovarian clones can be distinguished on the basis of their expression.  These results indicate that CTL of the TIL detect intratumor antigenic heterogeneity.  The novel heterogeneity identified within the ovarian tumor cells in this report may be of significance for understanding cellular immunity in ovarian cancer and developing adoptive specific immunotherapeutic approaches in ovarian cancer.
Evidence for the functional binding in vivo of tumor rejection antigens to antigen-presenting cells in tumor-bearing hosts.  Spleen cells of BALB/c mice bearing a syngeneic CSA1M fibrosarcoma were treated with anti-Thy-1.2 antibody plus C, yielding a T cell-depleted, APC-containing fraction.  The APC-containing fraction was first tested for its capacity to present exogenous modified-self or another tumor (Meth A) Ag after in vitro pulsing.  The results showed comparable Ag-presenting capacities to those obtained by APC-containing fraction from normal spleen cells, indicating that APC function is not affected in tumor-bearing mice.  We next examined whether APC from CSA1M-bearing mice bind endogenously generated CSA1M tumor Ag onto its surfaces to stimulate tumor-specific T cells.  Five rounds of inoculation of APC-containing fraction from CSA1M-bearing mice without further in vitro pulsing resulted in the induction of potent anti-CSA1M immune resistance.  The involvement of anti-CSA1M T cells in the induction of anti-CSA1M immunity was excluded by the fact that the in vivo immunity was excluded by the fact that the in vivo immunity was delivered by Thy-1+ cell-depleted, but not by Thy-1+ cell-enriched fractions of spleen cells from CSA1M-bearing mice.  Moreover, the failure of Sephadex G10-passed spleen cells to deliver anti-CSA1M resistance demonstrated the absolute requirement of APC for inducing the in vivo immunity.  Finally, this in vivo resistance was found to be tumor specific, because APC fractions from CSA1M-bearing and Meth A-bearing BALB/c mice induced immune resistance selective against the corresponding tumor cell challenge.  These results indicate that APC from tumor-bearing hosts can not only exert unaffected APC function against exogenous Ag, but also function to present tumor Ag generated endogenously in the tumor-bearing state and to produce tumor-specific immunity in vivo.
Multiple spinal epidural metastases; an unexpectedly frequent finding.  In a prospective study, patients with known malignant disease who were suspected of having a spinal epidural metastasis, had myelography which was not confined to the clinically suspected site, but included at least the whole lumbar and thoracic spinal canal.  Fifty four of the 106 myelograms revealed at least one epidural metastasis.  Twelve of these 54 myelograms showed two separate lesions, and four myelograms showed three separate lesions.  In all 16 cases with multiple lesions at least one of the lesions was asymptomatic at the time of the diagnosis.  It is concluded that multiple spinal epidural metastases are of common occurrence and occur in about one third of the cases.  This finding may have important clinical implications.  Examination of the spinal canal for epidural metastases should not be confined to the clinically suspected site, but should include as extensive an area as possible of the spinal canal, whatever technique is to be used.
Gemistocytic astrocytomas: a reappraisal.  Although gemistocytic astrocytomas are considered slow-growing astrocytomas, they often behave aggressively.  To clarify the biological and clinical behavior of these rare tumors, the authors retrospectively identified 59 patients with gemistocytic astrocytoma whose tumors were diagnosed and treated between June, 1976, and July, 1989.  Three patients who were lost to follow-up review were excluded, as were two whose original slides could not be obtained and three whose tumors were diagnosed at recurrence or at autopsy.  The pathological material of the remaining 51 patients was reviewed using two sets of histological criteria.  Thirteen patients (Group A) had "pure" gemistocytic astrocytoma, defined as a glial tumor with more than 60% gemistocytes/high-power field and a background of fibrillary astrocytes.  Fifteen patients (Group B) had "mixed" gemistocytic astrocytoma, defined as a glial tumor with 20% to 60% gemistocytes/high-power field and a background of anaplastic astrocytes.  Twenty-three tumors did not meet these criteria and were excluded from analysis.  The median age of the patients was 48.5 years in Group A and 38.3 years in Group B (p less than 0.05).  In both groups, the median Karnofsky Performance Scale score was greater than 90%.  All patients underwent surgical procedures (four total and 19 partial resections, and five biopsies) and postoperative radiation therapy.  The majority also had interstitial brachytherapy, chemotherapy, or both.  Ten patients had one reoperation for tumor recurrence and one had two reoperations; other treatments for recurrence included brachytherapy, chemotherapy, and repeat irradiation.  All four patients who originally underwent gross total resection are still alive; all five who had a biopsy have died.  There was no significant difference in median survival times between groups: 136.5 weeks in Group A (range 10 to 310+ weeks) and 135.6 weeks in Group B (range 31 to 460+ weeks).  Analysis of all 28 patients showed a better prognosis for patients less than 50 years of age (185 vs.  36 weeks survival time; p less than 0.001), patients with preoperative symptoms lasting for more than 6 months (228.1 vs.  110.2 weeks survival time; p less than 0.05), and patients with seizures as the first symptom (185.7 vs.  80 weeks survival time; p less than 0.01).  Survival time did not correlate with the presence of perivascular lymphocytic infiltration.  The authors conclude that the presence of at least 20% gemistocytes in a glial neoplasm is a poor prognostic sign, irrespective of the pathological background.  It is proposed that gemistocytic astrocytomas be classified with anaplastic astrocytomas and treated accordingly.
Improved survival with the use of adjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment of medulloblastoma.  Between 1975 and 1989, 108 children with newly diagnosed medulloblastoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (MB/PNET) of the posterior fossa were treated at the authors' institution.  The patients were managed uniformly, and treatment included aggressive surgical resections, postoperative staging evaluations for extent of disease, and craniospinal radiation therapy with a local boost.  Beginning in 1983, children with MB/PNET were prospectively assigned to risk groups; those with "standard-risk" MB/PNET were treated with radiation therapy alone, while those in the "poor-risk" group received similar radiation therapy plus adjuvant chemotherapy with 1-(2-chloroethyl)-3-cyclohexyl-1-nitrosourea (CCNU), vincristine, and cisplatin.  The 5-year actuarial disease-free survival rate for all patients treated between 1975 and 1982 was 68%, and 73% when patients who died within 2 weeks after operation were excluded.  This survival rate was statistically better for patients treated after 1982 (82%) compared to those treated between 1975 and 1982 (49%) (p less than 0.004).  There was no difference in disease-free survival rates over time for children with standard-risk factors; however, there was a significant difference in the 5-year survival rate for poor-risk patients treated prior to 1982 (35%) compared to those treated later (87%) (p less than 0.001).  For the group as a whole, a younger age at diagnosis correlated with a poorer survival rate; however, this relationship between age and outcome was significant only for children treated before 1983 (p less than 0.001).  These results demonstrated an encouraging survival rate for children with MB/PNET, especially those treated with aggressive surgical resection followed by both radiation therapy and chemotherapy.  The results strongly suggest that chemotherapy has a role for some, and possibly all, children with MB/PNET.
Interstitial chemotherapy with drug polymer implants for the treatment of recurrent gliomas.  Malignant gliomas have been difficult to treat with chemotherapy.  The most effective agent, BCNU (carmustine), has considerable systemic toxicity and a short half-life in serum.  To obviate these problems, a method has been developed for the local sustained release of chemotherapeutic agents by their incorporation into biodegradable polymers.  Implantation of the drug-impregnated polymer at the tumor site allows prolonged local exposure with minimal systemic exposure.  In this Phase I-II study, 21 patients with recurrent malignant glioma were treated with BCNU released interstitially by means of a polyanhydride biodegradable polymer implant.  Up to eight polymer wafers were placed in the resection cavity intraoperatively, upon completion of tumor debulking.  The polymer releases the therapeutic drug for approximately 3 weeks.  Three increasing concentrations of BCNU were studied; the treatment was well tolerated at all three levels.  There were no adverse reactions to the BCNU wafer treatment itself.  The average survival period after reoperation was 65 weeks for the first dose group, 64 weeks for the second dose group, and 32 weeks for the highest dose group.  The overall mean survival time was 48 weeks from reoperation and 94 weeks from the original operation.  The overall median survival times were 46 weeks postimplant and 87 weeks from initial surgery.  Eighteen (86%) of 21 patients lived more than 1 year from the time of their initial diagnosis and eight (38%) of 21 patients lived more than 1 year after intracranial implantation of the polymer.  Frequent hematology, blood chemistry, and urinalysis tests did not reveal any systemic effect from this interstitial chemotherapy.  Since the therapy is well tolerated and safe, a placebo-controlled clinical trial has been started.  The trial will measure the effect of the second treatment dose on survival of patients with recurrent malignant glioma.
Characterization of astrocytomas, meningiomas, and pituitary adenomas by phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy.  Phosphorus magnetic resonance (MR) spectroscopy allows noninvasive measurement of phosphate-containing compounds and pH within brain cells.  The authors obtained localized phosphorus MR spectra from 10 normal brains, four low-grade astrocytomas, six glioblastomas, four meningiomas, and three pituitary adenomas and found differences in the spectra of each tumor type.  Compared to normal brain, the spectra from low-grade astrocytomas showed a significant reduction of the phosphodiester (PDE) peak.  Glioblastomas were characterized by a significant reduction of the PDE peak, elevation of the phosphomonoester (PME) peak, and a relatively alkaline intracellular pH.  The spectra from meningiomas and pituitary adenomas were markedly different from the glial tumors.  Meningiomas showed significant reductions in phosphocreatine, PDE, and inorganic phosphate, as well as a relatively alkaline pH.  Pituitary adenomas resembled meningiomas, but had a much higher PME peak.  Although the number of tumors studied was small, there appears to be a characteristic spectrum associated with these different tumor types.  The present findings can be useful in the preoperative identification of these tumors and in furthering understanding of their growth and metabolism in vivo.
Hemangiopericytoma of the sciatic nerve. Case report.  The authors report the case of a hemangiopericytoma arising in a sciatic nerve.  It was found to be invasive within the epineurium but sparing surrounding tissues.  Adequate resection required sacrifice of the nerve.  Hemangiopericytomas can be added to the short list of mesodermal peripheral-nerve tumors.
Dose dependency of time of onset of radiation-induced growth hormone deficiency.  Growth hormone (GH) secretion during insulin-induced hypoglycemia was assessed on 133 occasions in 82 survivors of childhood malignant disease.  All had received cranial irradiation with a dose range to the hypothalamic-pituitary axis of 27 to 47.5 Gy (estimated by a schedule of 16 fractions over 3 weeks) and had been tested on one or more occasions between 0.2 and 18.9 years after treatment.  Results of one third of the GH tests were defined as normal (GH peak response, greater than 15 mU/L) within the first 5 years, in comparison with 16% after 5 years.  Stepwise multiple linear regression analysis showed that dose (p = 0.007) and time from irradiation (p = 0.03), but not age at therapy, had a significant influence on peak GH responses.  The late incidence of GH deficiency was similar over the whole dose range (4 of 26 GH test results normal for less than 30 Gy and 4 of 25 normal for greater than or equal to 30 Gy after 5 years), but the speed of onset over the first years was dependent on dose.  We conclude that the requirement for GH replacement therapy and the timing of its introduction will be influenced by the dose of irradiation received by the hypothalamic-pituitary axis.
Deep femoral lymphadenectomy with preservation of the fascia lata. Preliminary report on 42 invasive vulvar carcinomas.  Forty-two patients with primary invasive vulvar carcinoma were treated with radical vulvectomy and deep femoral lymphadenectomy with preservation of the fascia lata and cribriform fascia.  The rationale for using this technique was based on anatomic knowledge of the topographic distribution of groin lymph nodes, which was confirmed by the study of 50 cadavers.  The preliminary data show that the number of superficial and deep femoral lymph nodes removed from the 42 patients (mean number of nodes, 20; range, 8-32) was similar to the number reported in anatomy books.  In addition, the five-year actuarial survival rate, 70%, was comparable to that in the literature.  These preliminary results suggest that the surgical technique used in this study is as radical an oncologic procedure as Way's classic groin lymphadenectomy, which consists of removing the fascia lata and cribriform fascia.
Breast self-examination in relation to the occurrence of advanced breast cancer.  Two hundred nine female enrollees of the Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound who developed advanced-stage breast cancer during the period 1982-1988 were interviewed about their practice of breast self-examination (BSE), use of other breast cancer screening modalities, and medical and reproductive histories.  Each subject's description of how she performed the examination was scored according to her mention of up to 10 recommended BSE techniques.  A random sample of 433 women without advanced-stage breast cancer from the same population was interviewed for comparison.  Relative to women not practicing BSE, the risk of advanced-stage breast cancer among BSE users was 1.15 (95% confidence interval, 0.73-1.81).  Frequency of BSE did not differ between women with advanced-stage breast cancer and control subjects, whether in all subjects or in subgroups defined by age, use of mammography, or frequency of clinical breast examinations.  While self-described proficiency in BSE was generally low in both case and control subjects, the small percentage of women reporting more thorough self-examinations, regardless of frequency, had about a 35% decrease in the occurrence of advanced-stage breast cancer compared to women who did not perform BSE.  These results suggest that, while carefully performed BSE may avoid the development of some advanced-stage breast cancers, BSE as practiced by most Seattle-area women is of little or no benefit.
Expression of the antimetastatic gene nm23 in human breast cancer: an association with good prognosis.  The nm23 gene was identified in murine melanoma cells, in which its expression is associated with the cells' metastatic potential.  Expression of nm23 has been detected in human breast tumors by means of hybridization and immunocytochemistry.  We measured nm23 mRNA in 71 patients with primary breast cancer and found variable levels of nm23 expression.  The nm23 gene was expressed at higher levels in well-differentiated tumors (P less than .02).  There was a significant inverse relationship between nm23 expression and nodal status (P less than .02).  Expression of nm23 was positively associated with longer disease-free survival and overall survival, and the relationships were significant (P less than .002 and P less than .003, respectively).  This study showed that nm23 expression in human breast cancer was associated with good prognosis and a lack of lymph node metastasis and suggests that the nm23 gene product may play an important role in suppressing the metastatic phenotype.
Long-term follow-up of patients with recurrent malignant gliomas treated with adjuvant adoptive immunotherapy.  Between August 1986 and October 1987, the Denver Brain Tumor Research Group conducted a clinical trial using autologous human recombinant interleukin-2 (rIL-2)-activated lymphocytes to treat 20 patients with recurrent high-grade gliomas.  The trial involved surgical resection and/or decompression followed by intracavitary implantation of lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells and autologous stimulated lymphocytes (ASL) along with rIL-2 in a plasma clot.  One month later, stimulated lymphocytes and rIL-2 were infused through a Rickham reservoir attached to a catheter directed into the tumor bed.  The LAK cells were rIL-2-activated peripheral blood lymphocytes cultured for 4 days; the ASL were lectin- and rIL-2-activated peripheral blood lymphocytes cultured for 10 days.  Of the 20 patients treated, 11 were evaluated as a group (mean age, 44 years, range, 15-61 years; mean Karnofsky rating, 69, range, 50-100; mean Decadron dose at entry, 14 mg/d, range, 0-32).  The average number of lymphocytes implanted was 7.6 x 10(9) (range, 1.9-27.5 x 10(9], together with 1 to 4 x 10(6) U of rIL-2.  To date, 10 of the 11 patients died, all from recurrent tumor growth.  The median overall survival time was 63 weeks (range, 36-201; mean, 86).  The median survival time after immunotherapy was 18 weeks (range, 11-151; mean, 39).  No significant difference in survival after immunotherapy was found between those patients who had received previous chemotherapy and those who had not.  The use of steroids or prior chemotherapy did not influence the in vitro generation of ASL or LAK cells.
Disposition of cerebral metastases from malignant melanoma: implications for radiosurgery   Radiosurgery is becoming more generally available and indications for its use continue to be defined.  Cerebral metastases from malignant melanoma are often treated with whole-brain irradiation, but with limited benefit.  Innovative treatments, such as radiosurgery, make possible the delivery of doses of radiation that are higher than usual.  To determine how many patients might be candidates for radiosurgery, a retrospective analysis of computed tomographic brain scans performed on 41 patients with cerebral metastases from malignant melanoma was undertaken.  One-third of these patients were found to have cerebral metastases amenable to a radiosurgical approach, as illustrated radiation dose-volume histograms.  Patient and tumor characteristics suggest that this series is represent with cerebral metastases from malignant melanoma.  The implications of radiosurgery for normal tissue radiation tolerance and its effects on melanoma are discussed.
Early diagnosis of breast cancer. Universal screening is essential.  Breast cancer strikes 1 in 10 women in the United States.  Early diagnosis of breast cancer improves chances of survival.  With universal screening and expert evaluation of early clinical signs and symptoms of breast cancer, mortality rates can be reduced by 30% to 40%.  Physicians can help achieve this goal by taking an active role in patient education and promoting the availability of affordable screening mammography.
Primary CT diagnosis of abdominal masses in a PACS environment   Whether the display medium--film versus cathode ray tube (CRT)--affects observer performance during interpretation of computed tomographic (CT) images is an important research issue in these times of implementation and growth of picture archiving and communications systems in radiology.  The authors performed a multiobserver receiver operating characteristic (ROC) study to determine the performance of radiologists who read abdominal CT studies displayed on film, as well as on a high-resolution workstation (video monitor) that made use of three different display modes.  A total of 166 examinations were evaluated by eight radiologists, who recorded their ordinal confidence ratings of the demonstration of presence or absence of abdominal masses.  ROC analysis showed small differences in the confidence ratings assigned by individual readers for the detection and interpretation tasks.  Results for the group as a whole showed no significant reduction or improvement in observer performance when ratings for any one of the workstation display modes were analyzed.  The results of this study demonstrate that current CRT display technology is adequate for enabling the primary detection of abdominal masses with CT examinations.
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: prospective assessment of abdominal US in the localization of gastrinomas.  The ability of abdominal ultrasound (US) to help localize gastrinomas was prospectively studied in 79 patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.  The results were assessed by means of laparotomy, autopsy, or percutaneous liver biopsy.  For hepatic gastrinoma, US had a sensitivity of 63% and a specificity of 100%, with a positive predictive value of 100% and a negative predictive value of 89%.  US was slightly less sensitive for detecting gastrinoma in the liver than were computed tomography (CT) (66%) and selective angiography (78%).  For detection of extrahepatic gastrinoma, US had a sensitivity of 30%, a specificity of 94%, a positive predictive value of 100%, and a negative predictive value of 25%.  US enabled detection of tumor in eight cases not detected with CT and in four not detected with angiography.  Specificity for extrahepatic gastrinoma was similar for all three modalities (89%-95%).  CT and US were equally effective for the detection of extrahepatic gastrinoma, and angiography was significantly more effective than both US and CT (P less than .01).  The authors conclude that US, although of low sensitivity, remains useful as the initial imaging modality in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
Epithelial tumors of the ovary: CT findings and correlation with US.  One hundred thirty patients with 170 epithelial ovarian tumors were prospectively studied with computed tomography (CT) before surgery.  Ultrasound (US) was performed in 108 patients with 138 tumors.  At pathologic examination, 78 tumors (46%) were benign, 14 (8%) borderline, and 78 (46%) malignant.  CT results were compared with surgical and pathologic findings in all patients.  CT enabled detection of 148 of 170 tumors (87%), and US enabled detection of 118 of 138 tumors (86%).  Benign serous cystadenomas (n = 42) were correctly characterized with a sensitivity of 69% at CT and 70% at US.  Benign mucinous cystadenomas (n = 21) were correctly characterized with a sensitivity of 62% at CT and 50% at US.  Malignancy was suggested in nine of 14 patients (64%) with borderline tumors at CT and in five of 14 (36%) at US.  The overall accuracy of characterization of benign versus malignant tumors (including borderline tumors) was 94% with CT and 80% with US.  In the 108 patients studied with both CT and US, the sensitivity of CT was significantly superior to that of US (P less than .03), whereas there was no significant difference in specificity (P = .125).
Intraoperative I-125 seed implantation for extensive recurrent head and neck carcinomas.  From 1978 to 1988, 41 patients with extensive recurrent carcinomas of the head and neck were treated with surgical resection plus intraoperative iodine-125 seed implantation.  Surgery was performed to resect the tumors and to expose the tumor beds for implantation.  I-125 seeds were implanted intraoperatively, with a spacing of 0.75-1 cm between adjacent seeds, either into the soft tissue in the tumor bed or onto small patches of gelatin sponges to cover the bone, nerve, or blood vessel involved with disease.  Reconstructive flaps were used in 18 patients.  The average I-125 dose delivered by the implanted seeds was 8,263 cGy.  The determinate 5-year actuarial survival rate for the entire group was 40%.  The 5-year local disease control rate was 44%.  Major complications were transient wound infection (32%), flap necrosis (24%), fistula formation (10%), and carotid blowout (5%).  These results indicate that surgical resection plus I-125 seed implantation provides a potentially curative treatment for patients with extensive recurrent head and neck carcinomas that would be considered traditionally unresectable and that would be treated only with palliative therapy.
The value of symptom directed evaluation in the surveillance for recurrence of carcinoma of the breast.  Specific postoperative tests used to diagnose recurrent carcinoma of the breast were evaluated for their ability to have an impact on the over-all course of the disease.  Sixty-four patients with recurrent or new contralateral primary disease were divided into two groups based on the method of diagnosis.  Those patients with a new complaint at an interval between scheduled follow-up visits and who went on to have tests to document a recurrence were categorized as interval follow-up.  Those who were seen at a prearranged regular follow-up period and received tests as recommended by the attending physician or surgeon and had a documented recurrence were classified as routine follow-up.  Thirteen patients presented with new contralateral primary disease and 51 with metastatic disease (16, bone; 13, lung; 11, local; three, liver, and eight, multiple).  The median time to discovery of recurrence from the primary treatment was 29 and 28 months for the interval and routine groups, respectively.  Ninety per cent of the failures occurred by 53 months.  The survival time after recurrence was significantly greater in those patients diagnosed routinely (p = 0.003).  However, the over-all survival time (from primary therapy to death) was only significantly improved for the routine group when the contralateral new primary diseases were included (p = 0.009).  The method of diagnosis of a contralateral primary carcinoma was physical examination and mammogram.  Strong recommendations for follow-up testing can be limited to mammogram and physical examination.
Axillary lymphadenectomy for intraductal carcinoma of the breast.  During a ten year period, 175 axillary lymph node dissections were done as part of the treatment for intraductal carcinoma of the breast; 98 patients were treated with modified radical mastectomy and 77 were treated by mammary preservation, consisting of excision of the lesion, axillary dissection and radiation therapy.  One of 175 axillary node dissections yielded positive nodes.  Axillary dissection for intraductal carcinoma of the breast is unlikely to yield involved nodes and is not indicated for use in most instances.  It should be reserved for lesions demonstrating microinvasion.
Expression of beta 1 integrins in normal human keratinocytes.  The majority of cell adhesive events to the extracellular matrix are mediated by cell surface receptors, beta 1 integrins.  Keratinocytes express at least six different polypeptides of beta 1 integrin class, namely beta 1, alpha 2, alpha 3, alpha 5, and alpha 6 (alpha 6 is mainly associated with beta 4 polypeptide).  These epithelial cells use alpha 2 beta 1 as a collagen receptor and alpha 3 beta 1 as a fibronectin receptor, while alpha 6 beta 4 is the major basement membrane receptor.  Expression of alpha 5 beta 1 complex is low.  Processing of beta 1 integrins is fast in keratinocytes; half-maximal maturation takes only 3 hours.  In addition to their function in cell-matrix interactions, beta 1 integrins (alpha 2 beta 1 and alpha 3 beta 1) have also a role in maintaining keratinocyte cell-cell interactions.  It is possible that resting basal keratinocytes use beta 1 integrins as cell-cell adhesion receptors, and during activation, like in wound healing, these receptors relocalize to mediate events involving cell-matrix interactions.
Using a state cancer registry to increase screening behaviors of sisters and daughters of breast cancer patients.  The Pennsylvania Cancer Registry was used to contact breast cancer patients and, through them, their adult sisters and daughters.  The sisters and daughters were counseled concerning their higher than average risks for breast cancer and their need for mammography and breast self-examination.  Results showed a 9 percent increase in mammography and a 10 percent increase in breast self-examination rates for the counseled over control group.  Costs were $49 per counseled sister or daughter indicating a need to increase cost effectiveness before implementation is practical.
Subscapular elastofibroma in a young pitcher. A case report.  Subscapular elastofibromas and scapulothoracic bursitis can cause symptomatic masses in baseball pitchers.  Both processes appear to represent reactive soft tissue responses to repetitive stress at the inferior border of the scapula.  It is assumed that most masses in the subscapular area represent scapulothoracic bursitis rather than an elastofibroma.  However, it is possible that some of the masses treated conservatively as scapulothoracic bursitis may be elastofibromas.  A study is currently under way to evaluate the incidence of subscapular masses in college and professional pitchers in the United States.  A follow-up report is anticipated when the study has been completed.  The author requests information concerning any confirmed cases of elastofibroma in baseball pitchers.
The glucose transporter and blood-brain barrier of human brain tumors.  The glucose transporter of the human brain has been localized to endothelial cells expressing the blood-brain barrier, but little is known regarding its mechanism of induction or whether its expression is exclusively linked with restricted vascular permeability.  We investigated glucose transporter expression by vessels in human astrocytic tumors and pulmonary metastases to the brain using immunohistochemical techniques.  Vessels in 9 of 10 low-grade astrocytomas and 8 of 10 anaplastic astrocytomas were positive for glucose transporter.  Glioblastoma vessels were transporter-positive in only 2 of 10 specimens.  Vessels in all three metastatic tumors were negative for the glucose transporter.  The decrease in transporter expression observed in higher-grade tumors occurred independently of increases in vascular permeability.  In low-grade astrocytomas and glioblastomas transporter expression and contrast enhancement were inversely related, but vessels in 6 of 9 anaplastic astrocytomas were transporter-positive despite contrast enhancement.  These findings suggest that separate mechanisms induce the glucose transporter and the permeability restrictions of the human blood-brain barrier.  They also have potential implications for the therapy and prognosis of astroglial neoplasms.
Effects of treatment on long-term survivors with malignant astrocytomas.  We reviewed the records of 160 consecutive patients with glioblastoma and anaplastic astrocytoma to evaluate the long-term consequences of radiation therapy and chemotherapy.  We defined long-term survivors as those patients with glioblastoma or anaplastic astrocytoma who lived at least 100% longer than median survival of historical controls, for example, 2 years for patients with glioblastoma and 4 years for patients with anaplastic astrocytoma.  There were 9 (5.6%) long-term survivors.  Three (30%) became demented and died without evidence of tumor recurrence.  One, after survival of 10 years, died of tumor recurrence.  Of the remaining survivors, 2 (22%) have significantly impaired short-term memory function and other neurological deficits such as gait apraxia.  Three (30%) can function independently.  It is likely but cannot be proved that it is radiotherapy and not chemotherapy that is the causal factor of this dismal therapeutic outcome.  Our study suggests restraint in the use of radiotherapy for patients with brain tumors that have more favorable prognoses than glioblastomas and anaplastic astrocytomas, such as low-grade astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas.
Chemotherapy for medulloblastoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors of the posterior fossa.  Chemotherapy has only marginal efficacy in adult malignant brain tumors.  In contrast, drug therapy is considerably more effective in medulloblastoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors (MB/PNET) of the posterior fossa, the most common childhood primary central nervous system tumor.  At the time of disease recurrence, a variety of different single agents and drug combinations result in tumor shrinkage and increased survival.  The addition of chemotherapy to standard radiotherapy improves the rate and length of disease-free survival for those children with MB/PNET who have the most extensive tumors at diagnosis.  It remains to be determined which drug or drug combinations are the most effective in MB/PNET, and which patients are most likely to benefit from chemotherapy.  Chemotherapy may be useful to reduce or, in selected cases, obviate the need for radiotherapy and reduce treatment-related sequelae.
Comparative in vitro activities of newer quinolones against Pseudomonas species and Xanthomonas maltophilia isolated from patients with cancer.  The in vitro susceptibilities of three Pseudomonas species (Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Pseudomonas putida, and Pseudomonas fluorescens) and Xanthomonas maltophilia to quinolone antimicrobial agents were determined.  Several newer agents, particularly PD117558, PD117596, PD127391, sparfloxacin (AT-4140), A-56620, and temafloxacin, were active against Pseudomonas species.  X.  maltophilia isolates were generally less susceptible than were Pseudomonas isolates but were inhibited by some of the newer quinolones.
Therapeutic outcome of patients suffering from malignant melanomas of the conjunctiva.  Eighty-one cases of conjunctival melanoma treated between 1960 and 1988 were studied to determine factors that might affect outcome in patients with such lesions.  The therapeutic procedures performed were local excision (16), local excision followed by brachytherapy with Sr-90/Y-90 (32), local excision followed by cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen (16), brachytherapy with Sr-90/Y-90 (12), local excision followed by external beam irradiation (3), and local excision followed by brachytherapy and cryotherapy (2).  The median follow-up period was 5.5 years (longest 26, shortest 1 year).  Sixty two patients (76.5%) showed a complete regression of the melanoma, 19 (23.5%) developed recurrences, and 15 (18.5%) died from metastases.  The melanomas had developed with almost equal frequency from a pre-existing naevus (25.9%), from primary acquired melanosis (25.9%), and 'de novo' (30.9%).  Small tumours had a higher chance of regressing (80.6%) than larger ones (68.6%).  The cumulative survival rate was 76% after five years and 60% after 10 years from any causes of death and 87.6% after five years and 76.3% after 10 years from deaths caused by metastases.  Most deaths from metastases occurred within 5 years.  At 88.5%, the cumulative survival rate of patients with small tumours (less than one quadrant of the bulbar conjunctiva and less than 2 mm thickness) was significantly higher than that of patients with larger tumours (more than one quadrant of the bulbar conjunctiva and/or more than 2 mm thickness) with 65% after eight years.  Local excision followed by beta ray irradiation (Sr-90/Y-90) or cryotherapy can be recommended as the treatment of choice.  Nevertheless the behaviour of conjunctival melanomas remains unpredictable in individual cases.
Increased lysis of patient CD10-positive leukemic cells by T cells coated with anti-CD3 Fab' antibody cross-linked to anti-CD10 Fab' antibody.  An anti-CD3 Fab' x anti-CD10 Fab' bispecific hybrid F(ab')2 antibody (Ab) was generated.  This bispecific Ab had a molecular mass of 100 to 110 Kd, and the capacity to react with both CD3+ T cells and CD10+ acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cells.  We studied whether cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) could lyse patient CD10+ ALL cells after addition of the bispecific Ab.  As effector CTLs, interleukin-2 (IL-2)-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and CTL clones were used.  When IL-2-stimulated PBMCs were assayed for cytotoxicity to 61Cr-labeled CD10+ ALL cells, their activity was shown to be markedly enhanced by the addition of the bispecific Ab.  Most of the CTL clones established lacked cytotoxicity for CD10+ ALL cells, but addition of the bispecific Ab induced a significant level of cytotoxicity.  CTLs derived from ALL patients also showed significant cytotoxicity for autologous CD10+ ALL cells after addition of the bispecific Ab.  However, this Ab did not affect the cytotoxicity of CTLs when CD10- leukemic cells were used as the targets.  These findings suggest that the bispecific Ab can be used for immunotherapy in patients with CD10+ ALL.
Preliminary studies for an immunotherapeutic approach to the treatment of human myeloma using chimeric anti-CD38 antibody.  Multiple myeloma is a disease in which conventional chemotherapy has only limited value, but which may be ideal for treatment with passive antibody against a suitable cell surface antigen on the neoplastic plasma cell.  The CD38 antigen is known to be present on the majority of neoplastic plasma cells, and this was confirmed by detailed examination of bone marrow aspirates from three patients.  Strong expression of CD38 was confined to cells which, by the criteria of light-scattering profiles and possession of cytoplasmic Ig, were plasma cells.  The vast majority of neoplastic plasma cells appeared to be involved.  Using a cell line as a model, it was found that the CD38 antigen acts as a target for a chimeric antibody prepared from the antibody OKT10.  The chimeric antibody consists of the Fab portion of the mouse monoclonal antibody linked by a stable thioether bond to an Fc molecule derived from human IgG1, thereby forming mouse Fab-human Fc.  In contrast to the parent antibody, the chimeric molecule mediates antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) very efficiently with human blood mononuclear effector cells, and is effective at low concentration.  Also, even though the CD38 antigen is present on natural killer cells, there appears to be little deleterious action of the antibody on effector cell function.  The antibody also failed to affect the growth of progenitor cells of the granulocyte/macrophage or erythroid lineages present in normal bone marrows, despite the suspicion that these cells express the antigen.  Other advantages of the CD38 molecule are that it is not found in the serum of patients with myeloma, and it does not appear to modulate in vitro.  Fourteen patients with florid myeloma and on various chemotherapeutic regimes had an undiminished capacity to mediate ADCC with the chimeric antibody, when compared with normal individuals.  The maintenance of ADCC activity, coupled with the known suppression of the antibody response in these patients, augers well for treatment with chimeric antibody.
Selective hypersensitivity to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor by juvenile chronic myeloid leukemia hematopoietic progenitors.  Juvenile chronic myelogenous leukemia (JCML) is a good model for the study of myeloproliferation because JCML hematopoietic progenitor cells grow in vitro at very low cell densities without the addition of exogenous stimulus.  Previous studies have demonstrated that this proliferation is dependent on granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and that removal of monocytes from the cell population before culture eliminates this "spontaneous" myeloproliferation, suggesting a paracrine role of monocyte stimulation.  However, subsequent studies have shown that increased GM-CSF production from the JCML monocytes is not a consistent finding and therefore not a plausible sole mechanism.  In examining hematopoietic growth factor dose-response curves, both JCML GM and erythroid nonadherent progenitor cell populations displayed a marked and selective hypersensitivity to GM-CSF.  Responses to interleukin-3 and G-CSF were identical to control dose-response curves.  This is the first demonstration of a myeloid leukemia in which hypersensitivity to a specific growth factor appears to be involved in the pathogenesis of the disease.
Expression of laminin and its receptor LBP-32 in human and rat hepatoma cells.  Dramatic cellular changes that occur during hepatocarcinogenesis are associated with major alterations in extracellular matrix formation and in the relationships between cells and their microenvironment.  We have studied the expression of laminin, the major noncollagenous glycoprotein of basement membrane, and the laminin receptor 32 kD laminin-binding protein in two rat (Faza 967 and HTC) and two human (HepG2 and HBGC2) hepatoma cell lines that express a variety of liver-specific functions.  Laminin was found in the rough endoplasmic reticulum of these cells when the indirect immunoperoxidase method and electron microscopic examination were used.  Radiolabeled laminin, immunoprecipitated from both media and cell extracts, was resolved by electrophoresis on sodium dodecyl sulfate gel in two major polypeptides that comigrated with the A and B subunits from Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm tumor laminin.  Immunoblot analysis showed that the Mr = 400,000 polypeptide did not correspond to the A subunit of laminin.  Northern blot analyses demonstrated large amounts of B1 and B2 mRNAs but no A chain mRNA.  We conclude that the tumor cells produce the laminin B chains only.  In contrast, normal adult hepatocytes from either man or rat lacked laminin mRNAs, whereas in 1-day primary culture, B chain mRNAs became detectable.  The steady-state level of 32 kD laminin-binding protein mRNA was 10-fold and threefold higher in rat hepatoma cells than in freshly isolated and 1-day cultured normal rat hepatocytes, respectively.  In human hepatocytes, the steady-state levels of 32 kD laminin-binding protein mRNAs varied depending on the donor and never reached the level of the human hepatoma cells.
Cyclosporine enhances the growth of carcinogen-induced enzyme-altered foci in rat liver.  Cyclosporine, a powerful immunosuppressant, has been used successfully for organ transplantation.  Its efficacy on liver transplants of patients with primary hepatic tumors remains controversial because of a high rate of recurrence of the original tumors in the transplanted livers.  In this study, we experimentally tested whether cyclosporine exerts any effects on the growth of carcinogen-initiated liver cells using the short-term assays of rat liver carcinogenesis.  Dietary cyclosporine, which maintained sufficient levels of blood cyclosporine and suppressed host immune functions, enhanced the development of the glutathione S-transferase, placental form-positive hepatocyte foci in the liver of male F-344 rats treated with a single weekly dose of diethylnitrosamine (75 mg/kg) for 3 wk.  Dietary cyclosporine also accelerated the growth of preformed glutathione S-transferase, placental form-positive foci induced by a single dose of diethylnitrosamine (250 mg/kg) followed by the promoting regimen of a choline-deficient diet.  It is possible that the enhancement of the size of hepatocyte foci by cyclosporine could be due to stimulation of growth or inhibition of regression.  The mechanisms by which cyclosporine modifies the growth of preneoplastic lesions in the liver are not yet fully understood.  Possible involvement of immunologically relevant cells in the liver, Kupffer cells and pit cells in the process is suggested.
Hepatitis B virus integration in hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma in childhood.  In Taiwan, hepatocellular carcinoma is one of the major malignancies in children between 5 and 14 yr of age.  We studied the status of hepatitis B virus DNA in the hepatocellular carcinoma and nontumorous liver tissues of eight children with positive serum HBsAg and maternal HBsAg.  The hepatocellular carcinoma tissues from five of the eight children showed integration of hepatitis B virus DNA into host cellular DNA sequences.  A pattern of single-site integration in four children and a multiple-site integration pattern in one child were demonstrated.  In the remaining three children, hepatitis B virus DNA could not be demonstrated in the tumor tissues.  Using subgenomic fragments of the hepatitis B virus genome as probes, we found that the X gene fragment and the surface antigen gene fragment were the most conserved sequences.  The single-site integration of hepatitis B virus DNA in childhood hepatocellular carcinoma may have hit the critical region, resulting in insertional mutagenesis and early development of hepatocellular carcinoma.  With a short incubation period and less exposure to environmental carcinogens during early life, childhood hepatocellular carcinoma may provide a good model to study the carcinogenic potential of hepatitis B virus.
Liposarcoma arising in the cheek: report of a case and review of the literature.  The following points can be made about liposarcoma of the oral cavity: 1) it is rare and slow growing; 2) it is often mistaken for a benign lesion; 3) there is a direct correlation of microscopic appearance with biological behavior and prognosis; 4) treatment is primarily surgical, with radiation used for selected cases; and 5) the better-differentiated tumors seem to respond more favorably to radiation.
A cohort study of fat intake and risk of breast cancer.  Between 1982 and 1987, 519 newly incident, histologically confirmed cases of breast cancer were identified in a cohort of 56,837 women enrolled in the Canadian National Breast Screening Study.  These women had completed a dietary questionnaire before the occurrence of their breast cancer, and this has been used to estimate their intake of dietary fat and several other nutrients.  There is evidence of a positive association between breast cancer and total fat intake, with a relative risk of 1.35 (95% confidence interval, 1.00-1.82) per 77 g per day, and some evidence of a dose-response relationship (P = .052).
A hypothesis: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs reduce the incidence of large-bowel cancer.  Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) inhibit prostaglandin synthesis and tumor growth in the rodent colon.  We assessed NSAID use in relation to risk of human large-bowel cancer in a hospital-based, case-control study of 1326 patients with colorectal cancer and 4891 control patients.  For regular NSAID use that continued into the year before interview, the multivariate relative risk estimate was 0.5 (95% confidence interval, 0.4 to 0.8); the estimate decreased as the duration of use increased, but the trend was not statistically significant.  Similar results were obtained whether cancer or non-cancer controls were used, and the inverse association was apparent for both colon cancer and rectal cancer in men and women and in subjects younger and older than 60 years.  Regular NSAID use that had been discontinued at least 1 year previously and non-regular use were not associated with risk.  Almost all regular NSAID use was of aspirin-containing drugs.  The present data suggest that the sustained use of NSAIDs reduces the incidence of human large-bowel cancer.
Rising incidence of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastric cardia   Analyses of cancer incidence data from nine areas of the United States revealed steadily rising rates from 1976 to 1987 of adenocarcinomas of the esophagus and gastric cardia.  The increases among men in this period ranged from 4% to 10% per year, and thus exceeded those of any other type of cancer.  In contrast, there were relatively stable trends for squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus and slight declines for adenocarcinoma of more distal portions of the stomach.  Adenocarcinomas of the esophagus and gastric cardia disproportionately affected white men and rarely occurred among women.  By the mid-1980s, among white men, adenocarcinomas accounted for about one third of all esophageal cancers, while cardia cancers accounted for about one half of all stomach cancers with specified subsites.  The rising incidence rates and similar demographic patterns point to the need for investigation into the causes of these poorly understood cancers.
Influence of chromosomal integration on glucocorticoid-regulated transcription of growth-stimulating papillomavirus genes E6 and E7 in cervical carcinoma cells.  In most cervical carcinoma cells the E6 and E7 genes of specific human papillomaviruses are transcribed from viral sequences integrated into host cell chromosomes.  Glucocorticoids activate the promoter elements of various human papillomaviruses in transient-expression assays.  We have analyzed the effect of dexamethasone on the transcription rate of human papillomavirus 18 E6 and E7 genes integrated at different chromosomal sites in four cervical cancer cell lines.  Dexamethasone led to an increase in the transcription rate of the integrated E6-E7 sequences in C4-1 and C4-2 cells but led to a decrease in SW 756 cells and did not affect the transcription rate in HeLa cells.  However, when the viral promoter elements derived from HeLa or SW 756 cells, in which dexamethasone does not activate transcription of the integrated E6-E7 sequences, were tested in transient-expression assays within the same cell lines, dexamethasone consistently activated the viral promoter.  It thus appears that dominant regulatory mechanisms presumably depending on the chromosomal integration site are able to override the response of the viral promoter to steroid hormones.  The growth rate of all dexamethasone-treated cell lines correlated consistently with the expression of the papillomavirus E6 and E7 genes, supporting their role in the maintenance of the proliferative phenotype of cervical carcinoma cells.  Since human papillomaviruses are integrated into the host cell genome at variable, presumably randomly selected chromosomal loci, regulatory mechanisms that influence viral gene expression, and hence cell growth, may differ among cancers of independent clonal origin.
Human catechol-O-methyltransferase: cloning and expression of the membrane-associated form.  A cDNA clone for human catechol-O-methyltransferase (hCOMT; S-adenosyl-L-methionine:catechol O-methyltransferase; EC 2.1.1.6) was isolated from a human hepatoma cell line (Hep G2) cDNA library by hybridization screening with a porcine cDNA probe.  The cDNA clone was sequenced and found to have an insert of 1226 nucleotides.  The deduced primary structure of hCOMT is composed of 271 amino acid residues with the predicted molecular mass of 30 kDa.  At its N terminus it has a hydrophobic segment of 21 amino acid residues that may be responsible for insertion of hCOMT into the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.  The primary structure of hCOMT exhibits high homology to the porcine partial cDNA sequence (93%).  The deduced amino acid sequence contains two tryptic peptide sequences (T-22, T-33) found in porcine liver catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT).  The coding region of hCOMT cDNA was placed under the control of the cytomegalovirus promoter to transfect human kidney 293 cells.  The endogenous COMT activity, which was approximately 9.98 units per mg of protein in the untransfected cells, increased to 206 units per mg of protein upon transfection with a plasmid containing the COMT cDNA.  The COMT activity of recombinant protein was inhibited competitively (IC50 = 700 nM) by the selective COMT inhibitor Ro 40-7592.  An anti-COMT monoclonal antibody recognized, on immunoblots, a major polypeptide with apparent molecular mass of 29 kDa, in reasonable agreement with the predicted molecular mass.  The recombinant hCOMT was shown by immunoblot analysis to be mainly associated with the membrane fraction.  RNA blot analysis revealed one COMT mRNA transcript of 1.4 kilobases in Hep G2 poly(A)+ RNA.
Stimulation of cAMP and phosphomonoester production by melanotropin in melanoma cells: 31P NMR studies.  A major part of the present understanding of the molecular basis of signal transduction has been gained from in vitro studies using classical biochemical methods.  In this study, we used 31P NMR spectroscopy to investigate the response of live M2R mouse melanoma cells to stimulation by melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH; melanotropin).  In the presence of 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine and a synergistic dose of forskolin (1.67 microM), MSH induced a transient (approximately 60-min) rise in the cellular concentration of 3',5'-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which coincided in time with an equivalent decrease (approximately 40%) in ATP.  However, no detectable change in phosphocreatine concentration was observed.  Concomitantly, MSH induced a striking and unexpected increase in the concentration of three phosphomonoester (PME) metabolites (approximately 2-fold increase in total PME signal area); one signal has been assigned to phosphoethanolamine.  The levels of the PMEs remained high for 2-4 hr and declined slowly (approximately 10 hr) to basal level, following perfusion with fresh culture medium.  The increase in PME was also observed after stimulation with MSH alone.  In contrast, stimulation with a high dose of forskolin (50 microM) and isobutylmethylxanthine (0.2 mM), although effective in stimulating the production of cAMP, did not induce the PME response.  Evaluation of the cells' energetics indicated that the enhanced production of phosphoethanolamine is probably not due to ethanolamine phosphorylation.  Therefore, it is likely to result from hydrolysis of phosphatidylethanolamine by a specific phospholipase C.  The response of the PMEs appears to be regulated by a cAMP-independent process, suggesting the existence of an alternative transduction pathway controlled by MSH.
Mononuclear phagocytes: a major population of effector cells responsible for rejection of allografted tumor cells in mice.  To understand the in situ mechanism of immunological response of recipient animals to allografted tumor cells, the types of cells that infiltrated into the rejection site were examined.  When Meth A cells (H-2d) were given i.p.  to an allogeneic [C57BL/6 (H-2b)] strain of mouse, the tumor cells ceased to grow on the 6th day, accompanied by an i.p.  infiltration of leukocytes.  The tumor cells were totally eliminated from the peritoneal cavity around the 12th day.  The highest cytotoxic activity against Meth A cells was obtained with the peritoneal exudate cells harvested on day 8.  On this day, the exudate cells consisted of three populations when examined by flow cytometry, and each was isolated by sorting.  Each of them appeared to be homogeneous, and they were morphologically identified as lymphocytes; granulocytes; and medium-sized, mononuclear, less-granular cells.  The cytotoxic activity was confined exclusively to the last population.  The effector cells (H-2b) were cytotoxic against not only Meth A cells (H-2d) but also concanavalin A-stimulated allogeneic spleen cells [C3H/He (H-2k), CBA/N (H-2k), A/J (H-2a), BALB/c (H-2d), and DBA/2 (H-2d) strains of mouse].  The effector cells were totally inert against concanavalin A-activated syngeneic spleen cells [C57BL/6 (H-2b) and C57BL/10 (H-2b) strains of mouse].  The effector cells were phenotypically (Thy-1.2- CD3- Lyt-1- Lyt-2- L3T4- immunoglobulin- asialo GM1-), morphologically, and functionally distinct from cytotoxic T cells, natural killer cells, and lymphokine-activated killer cells but were adherent mononuclear phagocytes.
Intracranial chordoma in a preadolescent. Case report.  Chordomas are rare tumors derived from notochord remnants occurring primarily in the sacrum, clivus, and cervical regions.  Exceptionally, these tumors occur in children, though usually in the sacrum.  Eight cases of clivus chordoma have been described in preteenagers.  In this report, a clival chordoma with unusual radiologic features is described in an 11-year-old boy.  The literature regarding this entity is reviewed.
Immunochemical studies on the differential binding properties of two monoclonal antibodies reacting with Tn red cells.  Two monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs), BRIC 66 (IgM) and BRIC 111 (IgG1), were produced by immunizing mice with ovarian cyst blood group A1 glycoprotein and Tn red cells (RBCs), respectively.  Their specificities were determined by inhibitions using Tn sialoglycoproteins (SGPs), mucins (armadillo [ASG] and ovine [OSG] submaxillary glycoproteins), and monosaccharides.  BRIC 66 agglutinated both Tn and group A RBCs and reacted immunohistochemically with both the vascular endothelium and tumor cells from a group A adenocarcinoma, BRIC 66 was inhibited by N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc), Tn SGPs, and mucins on both hemagglutination inhibition tests and radioimmunoassay.  BRIC 111 agglutinated Tn RBCs only, and it specifically stained tumor cells from a group O patient's breast carcinoma and a group A patient's adenocarcinoma.  In hemagglutination inhibition tests, BRIC 111 was readily inhibited by Tn SGPs, only partially inhibited by GalNAc, and not inhibited by mucins.  In a sensitive radioimmunoassay, BRIC 111 was inhibitable by GalNAc.  Tn SGP was 2000-fold more effective as an inhibitor than the mucins (ASG and desialized OSG), which contain a high content of terminal alpha-GalNAc-O-serine (threonine) residues.  It is postulated that BRIC 66 is specific for terminal alpha-GalNAc units in carbohydrate chains.  The exclusive reaction of BRIC 111 with Tn SGP indicates a combining site larger than GalNAc alpha-1, which probably includes amino acid residues in juxtaposition to GalNAc in Tn SGP.  In view of its specific agglutination of Tn RBCs, BRIC 111 is a useful reagent for the examination of polyagglutinable RBCs.
Medullary thyroid cancer. An immunohistochemical and humoral study using six separate antigens   The authors investigated the humoral and tissue expression of six antigens associated with medullary thyroid cancer (MTC): calcitonin (CT), calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), somatostatin (SRIF), and thyroglobulin (TG).  The antigens were studied in the neoplastic C cells using immunohistochemistry with specific antisera and in the plasma using specific radioimmunoassay.  Eighteen patients (8 male and 10 female patients, aged 12-72 years) were studied.  Mean follow-up was 70.7 months (range, 2-179 months).  Nine patients (50%) died of their disease after a mean follow-up of 47.2 months (range, 2-116 months).  By immunostaining, primary tumors expressed CT and CEA in all cases and NSE was positive in 90%, CGRP in 66%, SRIF in 63%, and TG in 58%.  Metastatic tissues were positive in all cases of CT staining, 92.8% of CEA, 71.4% of NSE, 73.3% of CGRP, 38.5% of SRIF, and only 13.3% of TG staining.  In positive cases the percentage of positive cells and the degree of staining were variable among the different antigens.  The expression of an antigen in the neoplastic cells was associated with the hypersecretion of the corresponding antigen in the circulation in the case of CT and CEA.  The levels of these antigens were elevated in all patients with metastases and could accurately predict the appearance of new metastases or indicate the effective treatment of previous metastases by surgery.  In the case of NSE, CGRP, and SRIF, few patients had increased plasma concentrations of the antigens and these usually occurred during very advanced phases of the disease.  Detectable levels of serum TG were never observed.  When the outcome of the disease was compared with the expression of CT, CEA, NSE, CGRP, and TG, no correlation could be found.  On the contrary, SRIF expression in the primary tumor could differentiate two groups of patients with different survival rates.  SRIF-positive patients had survival rates of 100% and 50% at five and seven years, respectively, whereas SRIF-negative patients had survival rates of 40% at five years and 25% at seven years.
Small cell carcinomas of the large intestine.  The authors studied the clinical and pathologic features of 38 small cell carcinomas of the large intestine.  Most were located in the right colon.  Overlying adenomas were present in 45% and squamous differentiation in 21% of tumors.  Endocrine differentiation was present in all tumors by at least one method; neuron-specific enolase, dense-core granules, and synaptophysin were present in most cases.  Seventy-one percent of tumors metastasized to the liver; 64% of patients were dead at five months follow-up.  Twenty-one poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas and undifferentiated carcinomas of the large intestine accessioned during the same period showed less endocrine (7 of 21) and squamous differentiation (1 of 15) and fewer liver metastases (4 of 15) than did small cell carcinomas.  Among all 59 tumors studied, small cell histologic characteristics correlated better with liver involvement than did endocrine markers or other histologic features.  Small cell carcinomas of the large intestine are aggressive tumors with a propensity for early liver involvement.  Although there is a spectrum of squamous, endocrine, and glandular features in large bowel tumors of low degrees of differentiation, the identification of a small cell component appears to be most clinically relevant.
Automated immunohistochemical estrogen receptor in fixed embedded breast carcinomas.  The authors immunohistochemically assessed the presence of estrogen receptor (ER) in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections of 68 breast carcinomas by an automated method using Pronase (CalBiochem, La Jolla, CA) predigestion and alkaline phosphatase detection (Method 1).  These results were compared with those obtained by an automated peroxidase-antiperoxidase method with DNAse pretreatment of fixed embedded sections (Method 2), with ER immunostain on frozen sections (Method 3), and with biochemical results (dextran-coated charcoal cytosolic [DCC] assay).  Compared with the DCC assay, Methods 1, 2, and 3 gave sensitivities of 54%, 25%, and 89%, respectively.  The sensitivity for Method 1 was increased to 74% in those cases with DCC results showing greater than 50 fmol/mg protein.  These findings indicate that ER immunohistochemical studies on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues (as assayed by Method 1) provide useful clinical information when the results are positive.  A negative result, especially if surrounding normal elements are not positive, may indicate no receptors, receptor levels less than 50 fmol/mg protein, or improper tissue preservation.  In the absence of fresh tissue for ER assay by DCC assay or of frozen sections for immunostaining, and with an understanding of its limitations, this method may be useful.
Ovarian myxoma. A study of two cases with long-term follow-up.  Two cases of the so-called ovarian myxoma are reported.  One was from a 13-year-old girl who had a 31-year follow-up and no evidence of recurrence.  The second case, from a 65-year-old woman, recurred intraperitoneally, 19 years after the surgery.  Both tumors were myxoid, with round to stellate cells.  Immunohistochemical, electron microscopic (EM), and DNA flow cytometric (FCM) studies were performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue of the second patient on both the primary tumor and the recurrence.  Tumor cells expressed vimentin and were focally positive for desmin and myoglobin.  EM findings suggested a fibroblastic differentiation.  An aneuploid cell population was present in the recurrent tumor by DNA-FCM studies.  Only four other cases of so-called ovarian myxoma were reported to date, and the follow-up does not exceed 18 months.  The authors conclude that the presence of aneuploidy and the late recurrence of one of their cases suggest that certain ovarian myxomas might behave like low-grade sarcomas.  The histogenesis of this tumor remains unsettled, but similarities were found with myxomas in other locations.
Local reactions to radioiodine in the treatment of thyroid cancer.  PURPOSE: To compare the rate of local complications resulting from radioiodine ablation of thyroid cancer in patients with a residual intact thyroid lobe to that in patients who had more extensive surgical treatment prior to radioiodine administration.  PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively studied 59 patients who had received 131I between 1979 and 1989.  The patients were divided into two groups, depending on the extent of their previous surgical thyroid excision.  Group 1 comprised 10 patients with a lobectomy or hemithyroidectomy before the ablative radioiodine dose, and Group 2 comprised 49 patients with more extensive thyroid excision (near-total or subtotal thyroidectomy) before the radioiodine treatment.  RESULTS: Sixty percent of the 10 patients in Group 1 experienced some degree of neck pain or tenderness following radioiodine ablation of their residual thyroid.  In one case, the local reaction was very severe and accompanied by the development of transient hyperthyroidism.  There was only a 6% local complication rate in the patients who had undergone more extensive thyroid excision before ablative therapy (p less than 0.001), and none had a severe reaction.  CONCLUSIONS: Patients with only unilateral surgical excision before radioiodine therapy have a higher rate of local complications than do patients treated with more extensive surgery prior to radioiodine ablation.  If radioiodine is to be employed in such patients, they should be informed of this possible complication.  Since evidence supports a dose effect in the pathogenesis of the complications, we recommend using a dose of less than 30 mCi for the initial ablation in these patients even though it may be necessary to repeat this dose to complete thyroid ablation.
Suddenly symptomatic brain tumors at altitude.  High-altitude cerebral edema can present with a wide variety of neurologic manifestations; these symptoms resolve with descent.  The persistence of neurologic symptoms after descent suggests an intracranial lesion.  Brain tumors suddenly becoming symptomatic at altitude have not been reported previously.  We report three cases of previously unsuspected brain tumors that suddenly became symptomatic at high altitudes.
Surgical staging of cervical cancer.  Noninvasive radiologic methods to detect paraaortic lymph node metastases are reliable when combined with FNA of enlarged lymph nodes.  However, the sensitivity is low, and undetected microscopic metastases leads to treatment failure.  These patients with paraaortic lymph node metastasis are not treated with extended-field radiation, and they all die within 3 years.  The CT scanning is probably the best diagnostic method to evaluate cervical cancer, because it can assess the primary tumor, the urinary tract, gastrointestinal tract, liver parenchyma, and retroperitoneum.  It also permits the guidance of FNA and the arrangement of radiation ports.  Surgical staging provides the direct assessment of the peritoneal cavity and the retroperitoneal spaces.  Metastatic tumor, including enlarged lymph nodes, can be resected, but this is of dubious benefit.  The operative morbidity is acceptable, with fewer intestinal complications when the extraperitoneal approach is used, and long-term morbidity is minimal when appropriate paraaortic radiation doses are employed (less than 5,000 cGy).  Surgical staging has provided data on the frequency of paraaortic lymph node metastasis by stage of cervical cancer, and thus, treatment strategies can be better developed.  Extended-field radiation results in 5-year survival rates of 20-25% in patients with microscopic paraaortic lymph node metastasis, patients who would not survive without the treatment.  However, surgical staging has produced only a modest boost in survival rates, because of the high rate of pelvic and systemic failure.  When extended-field radiation is used prophylactically or in patients with probable lymph node metastasis seen on radiographic studies, survival rates are similar to patients irradiated after surgical staging finds paraaortic lymph node disease.  As our ability to predict, and detect nonsurgically, positive paraaortic node disease improves, extended radiation (or other adjuvant therapy) could be used more frequently without operation in patients who are at high risk for metastatic disease.  In a study by Haie et al, prophylactic paraaortic radiation was given to patients at high risk for paraaortic metastasis.  In patients with a high probability of local disease control, paraaortic radiation significantly reduced the incidence of paraaortic and distant metastases.  Patients with known paraaortic lymph node metastases frequently have occult systemic metastases.  In these same patients, pelvic failure is also common.  Thus, until effective systemic therapies emerge, a marked improvement in survival is unlikely in patients who have paraaortic lymph node metastasis.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
The management of malignant bone tumors in children and adolescents.  A series of 205 pediatric patients affected by osteosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma, fibrosarcoma, and malignant fibrous histiocytoma of bone were treated from 1978 to 1988.  Ninety-eight percent of the patients received chemotherapy and 63% had a surgical resection.  Sixty-five percent of all patients were alive at 30 months and were considered disease free.  The functional results after surgery were evaluated according to the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society score.  In all diaphyseal resections and resections of the upper extremity and pelvis, the results were excellent or good in 60% of the cases.  In resections of the proximal femur, distal femur, or proximal tibia and reconstruction with nonexpansible prostheses, the results were excellent or good in 75%.  On the other hand, when arthrodeses of the lower extremity were used, only 14% of cases had a good result.  This correlates with the resulting lack of articulation and serious limb shortening seen with progression of skeletal growth.
Dexamethasone-nonsuppressible cortisol in two cases with aldosterone-producing adenoma.  Forty-one patients with aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA) were subjected to a dexamethasone suppression test (DST) before surgery.  Serum cortisol and urinary excretion of 17-hydroxycorticosteroids were suppressed by dexamethasone in 39 patients [DST(+)].  In two patients (cases A and B), they were not suppressed [DST(-)].  Clinical manifestations of the two DST(-) patients were similar to those of DST(+) patients.  Hypertension, hypokalemia, high serum aldosterone levels, and suppressed PRA were found in all of the patients.  The cut surfaces of the adenomas from all of the patients, including cases A and B, were golden yellow, which is typical of APA.  However, atrophies of the adjacent normal tissues were evident exclusively in the two DST(-) patients.  After removal of the affected adrenals, the serum cortisol level was suppressed by dexamethasone in one of the DST(-) patients (case B).  These findings suggested autonomous cortisol production by APA.  To evaluate whether cortisol could be produced from the adenoma tissue, the presence of several steroidogenic enzymes was studied by immunohistochemistry and mRNA analysis in the adenomas and the adjacent nonneoplastic adrenals from the 2 DST(-) and 5 DST(+) patients.  Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that steroidogenic enzymes were expressed in APA tumor tissues from both DST(-) and DST(+) patients.  In both groups, mRNAs coding steroidogenic enzymes were present not only in the nonneoplastic but also in the tumor tissues.  Quantitative analysis of the mRNA levels revealed that in the adrenals from DST(+) patients, the mRNAs were more abundant in nonneoplastic tissue than in tumor tissue.  However, in those from DST(-) cases, the mRNAs were much more abundant in the tumor tissues than in the nonneoplastic tissues.  These results indicate that tumor cells of the two DST(-) patients autonomously synthesized not only aldosterone but also cortisol.  The diameters of the tumors from the two DST(-) patients exceeded 3 cm, while those from other DST(+) patients were smaller.  In patients with large APA, adrenal insufficiency should be anticipated upon removal of the tumor.
Endothelial markers in malignant vascular tumours of the liver: superiority of QB-END/10 over von Willebrand factor and Ulex europaeus agglutinin 1.  A new monoclonal antibody, QB-END/10, raised against the CD34 antigen in human endothelial cell membranes and haemopoietic progenitor cells, was studied for its usefulness as a marker of neoplastic vascular cells in 21 angiosarcomas and seven malignant haemangioendotheliomas of the liver.  QB-END/10 was both more sensitive and more specific than Von Willebrand factor (VWF) and Ulex europaeus 1 agglutinin (UEA-1) in labelling endothelial cells and it did not cross react with epithelia as UEA-1 often does.  Staining was uniformly strong and clear in all histological variants of these two tumours.  QB-END/10 should prove particularly useful in the differential diagnosis of malignant vascular tumours of the liver.
Generation of "soft x-rays" by using the free electron laser as a proposed means of diagnosing and treating breast cancer.  The diagnosis and treatment of breast lesions may be markedly enhanced by the use of a unique new source of near-monochromatic x-rays.  Concentric beams of near-monochromatic x-ray photons may be generated by collision of the free electron laser (FEL) electron beam with the optical beam in an interaction zone that delivers the x-rays to a shirtsleeve environment.  The absence of Compton scatter and the photoelectric interaction within tissues improves conspicuity of lesions by two to six times.  Increased attenuation of x-rays in malignant vs.  normal tissues makes tumors more obvious.  K-edge subtraction allows chemical analysis of tumors in vivo--all at radiation doses that are one-tenth to one-fiftieth that delivered by the lowest-dose mammographic x-ray technique available.  This allows for an increased sensitivity and specificity and permits prediction of histology, negating necessity for biopsies.  Selective bond-breaking at depth in tissues as well as x-ray-activated photodynamic therapy are also being explored.
Effective surgical adjuvant therapy for high-risk rectal carcinoma   BACKGROUND.  Radiation therapy as an adjunct to surgery for rectal cancer has been shown to reduce local recurrence but has not improved survival.  In a previous study, combined radiation and chemotherapy improved survival significantly as compared with surgery alone, but not as compared with adjuvant radiation, which many regard as standard therapy.  We designed a combination regimen to optimize the contribution of chemotherapy, decrease recurrence, and improve survival as compared with adjuvant radiation alone.  METHODS.  Two hundred four patients with rectal carcinoma that was either deeply invasive or metastatic to regional lymph nodes were randomly assigned to postoperative radiation alone (4500 to 5040 cGy) or to radiation plus fluorouracil, which was both preceded and followed by a cycle of systemic therapy with fluorouracil plus semustine (methyl-CCNU).  RESULTS.  After a median follow-up of more than seven years, the combined therapy had reduced the recurrence of rectal cancer by 34 percent (P = 0.0016; 95 percent confidence interval, 12 to 50 percent).  Initial local recurrence was reduced by 46 percent (P = 0.036; 95 percent confidence interval, 2 to 70 percent), and distant metastasis by 37 percent (P = 0.011; 95 percent confidence interval, 9 to 57 percent).  In addition, combined therapy reduced the rate of cancer-related deaths by 36 percent (P = 0.0071; 95 percent confidence interval, 14 to 53 percent) and the overall death rate by 29 percent (P = 0.025; 95 percent confidence interval, 7 to 45 percent).  Its acute toxic effects included nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia.  These effects were seldom severe.  Severe, delayed treatment-related reactions, usually small-bowel obstruction requiring surgery, occurred in 6.7 percent of all patients receiving radiation, and the frequencies of these complications were comparable in both treatment groups.  CONCLUSIONS.  The combination of postoperative local therapy with radiation plus fluorouracil and systemic therapy with a fluorouracil-based regimen significantly and substantively improves the results of therapy for rectal carcinoma with a poor prognosis, as compared with postoperative radiation alone.
Clinical importance of myeloid-antigen expression in acute lymphoblastic leukemia of childhood.  BACKGROUND.  Leukemic cells in 15 to 25 percent of patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) express myeloid antigens as well as lymphoid antigens (the latter reflecting B-cell or T-cell lineage).  The relations of myeloid-antigen expression to other features of ALL and to prognosis have been controversial.  METHODS.  We analyzed clinical and laboratory features present at diagnosis in 236 consecutive cases of ALL in children.  Immunophenotyping, including single- and dual-fluorescence analyses, was used to classify leukemic cells as B or T lymphoblasts and also to identify myeloid-antigen expression--the simultaneous expression of lymphoid-associated antigens and at least one of three myeloid-associated antigens (CD33, CD13, and CD14) on cells classified as L1 or L2 according to the French-American-British system.  RESULTS.  Forty-five of 185 patients with B-lineage ALL had myeloid-antigen expression, as did 8 of 41 patients with T-lineage ALL.  In 10 patients, the lineage could not be determined.  Myeloid-antigen expression was associated with L2 morphology (P less than 0.05), but it did not correlate with other prognostic features recognized previously.  Multivariate analysis showed that myeloid-antigen expression was an important predictor of relapse in childhood ALL and the most significant prognostic factor statistically (P less than 0.0001).  A white-cell count greater than or equal to 50 x 10(9) per liter at diagnosis was also an important and highly significant prognostic feature (P less than 0.001).  After 40 months, the estimated disease-free survival for patients with ALL was 84 percent for those without myeloid-antigen expression and with a low white-cell count, 57 percent for those without myeloid-antigen expression and with a high white-cell count, 47 percent for those with myeloid-antigen expression and a low white-cell count, and 26 percent for those with myeloid-antigen expression and a high white-cell count (P less than 0.00001).  CONCLUSIONS.  Myeloid-antigen expression is an important independent predictor of a poor response to chemotherapy in childhood ALL.
Interstitial irradiation and hyperthermia for the treatment of recurrent malignant brain tumors.  Between June 1987 and June 1989, 29 recurrent malignant gliomas or recurrent solitary brain metastases in 28 patients were treated in a Phase I study of interstitial irradiation and hyperthermia.  Patient age ranged from 18 to 65 years, and the Karnofsky Performance Status scores ranged from 40 to 90%.  There were 13 glioblastomas, 10 anaplastic astrocytomas, 3 melanomas, and 3 adenocarcinomas.  Catheters were implanted stereotactically after computed tomography-based preplanning.  Hyperthermia was administered before and after brachytherapy, using one to six 2450- or 915-MHz helical coil microwave antennas and one to three multisensor fiberoptic thermometry probes.  The goal was to heat as much of the tumor as possible to 42.5 degrees C for 30 minutes.  Within 30 minutes after the first hyperthermia treatment, implant catheters were afterloaded with high-activity iodine-125 seeds delivering tumor doses of 32.6 to 61.0 Gy.  Most patients had no sensation of heating.  Complications included seizures in 5 patients, reversible neurological changes in 9 patients, a scalp burn in 1, and infections in 3.  Of 28 evaluable 2-month follow-up scans, 11 showed definite improvement in the radiological appearance of the tumor, 4 were slightly improved, 7 were stable, and 6 showed tumor progression.  Ten patients underwent reoperation for persistent tumor and/or necrosis.  Eleven of 28 patients are alive 40 to 97 weeks after treatment.  Thirteen patients died of a brain tumor, 2 died of extracranial melanoma metastases, 1 died of new brain melanoma metastases, and 1 died of a pulmonary embolus.  The median survival was 55 weeks overall.  Median survival has not yet been reached for the anaplastic astrocytoma subgroup.  We conclude that interstitial brain hyperthermia using helical coil microwave antennas is technically feasible.  The level of toxicity is acceptable, and the computed tomographic response rate is encouraging.
Expression of platelet-derived growth factors, transforming growth factors, and the ros gene in a variety of primary human brain tumors.  Ribonucleic acid was isolated from a wide spectrum of central nervous system tumors to examine the expression of platelet-derived growth factors (PDGF) A and B, tumor growth factors (TGF-beta) 1 and 2, and ros messenger ribonucleic acid.  Eight glioblastoma cell lines were examined as well as cell cultures from 22 tumor explants.  The explants included 6 glioblastomas, 4 anaplastic astrocytomas, 5 astrocytomas, 3 ependymal tumors, 2 meningiomas, 1 medulloblastoma.  and 1 ganglioglioma.  For comparison, 2 nontumor glial cell cultures were included.  The PDGF B-chain was expressed in 5 of 8 glioblastoma cell lines, 2 of 6 glioblastomas, and in 3 of 4 anaplastic astrocytoma explants.  There was no PDGF B expression in 4 astrocytomas, 3 ependymomas of varying malignancy, in the remainder of the tumors, or in the nontumor glial cells.  The PDGF A-chain was expressed in all of the tumors, with the exception of the malignant ependymoma and in both nontumor glial cell cultures.  TGF-beta 1 was expressed in all of the tumors and in nontumor glial cells.  The expression of TGF-beta 2 was expressed in many of the benign and malignant tumors and also in both nontumor glial cell cultures.  The ros messenger ribonucleic acid was expressed in 1 of 5 glioblastoma cell lines and in 2 of 6 glioblastoma cell explants, but in none of the other tumors or in the nontumor glial cells.
Spinal glioblastomas: report of seven cases and review of the literature.  Intramedullary glioblastomas are uncommon tumors.  They occur chiefly in the cervicothoracic segments, have a slight tendency to occur in the early decades of life, and have a short clinical history before diagnosis.  We report seven cases and discuss the salient features of these tumors, particularly the pathological features and treatment, in light of the relevant literature.
Oral cancer: a survey of 566 cases from the University of Connecticut Oral Pathology Biopsy Service, 1975-1986.  A survey of the University of Connecticut Oral Pathology Biopsy Service was undertaken to analyze cases of oral cancer accessioned during the 12-year period, 1975 through 1986 inclusive.  Of 33,429 total specimens accessioned, there were 546 malignant oral neoplasms diagnosed and reported.  Sixty-five (11.5%) originated from out of state.  Invasive intraoral squamous cell carcinoma was the predominant tumor (69.7% of total), whereas lip cancer constituted only 2.8% of all malignancies.  Minor salivary gland adenocarcinomas accounted for 11% of total malignancies whereas verrucous carcinoma, carcinoma in situ, and miscellaneous other forms of oral cancer accounted for the remainder (4.6%, 5.3%, and 6.6%, respectively).  Cases of invasive squamous cell carcinoma were further analyzed by year, sex distribution, location subsite, age at diagnosis, and histologic grade.  With the exception of histologic grading, we found that the characterization of cases of squamous cell carcinoma within the biopsy service tended to parallel results from a separate but related statewide analysis of both oral cancer and intraoral squamous cell carcinoma from Connecticut over a much longer time span.  We concluded that the picture of oral cancer as characterized by cases within the University of Connecticut Oral Pathology Biopsy Service is generally reflective of the disease on a statewide level.
Ectatic blood vessels in port-wine stains lack innervation: possible role in pathogenesis.  The innervation pattern of port-wine stains was investigated using indirect immunohistochemistry with antibodies to protein gene product 9.5 (PGP 9.5), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), and neurofilament (NF).  The pathologically dilated vessels in the middle and deep dermis were found to have defective innervation with only single or no nerve fibers in their vicinity, while other structures in the skin showed a normal density of fibers.  NSE- and PGP-like immunoreactive (-LI) nerve fibers were observed innervating vessels with a normal morphology and other structures in the skin, such as sweat glands and hair follicles, as free nerve endings and in nerve bundles.  The nerve bundles were often seen to pass the ectatic vessels without giving off any branches.  CGRP-LI nerve fibers were detected running toward epidermis, whereas no fibers were found around the ectatic vessels.  NF-LI fibers were seen innervating normal vessels in dermis, while in relation to the dilated vessels, no or only occasional fibers were observed.  The lack of innervation may be of importance for the development of the disease as a result of decreased tonus of the vessels and/or a loss of neuronal trophic factors.
A community study of delay in presenting with signs of melanoma to medical practitioners.  In the absence of more effective treatment for advanced tumors, early diagnosis and treatment of localized tumors is the most effective way of reducing the burden of illness associated with melanoma.  This study examined the following factors: prevalence of signs of melanoma (a mole changing in size, shape, appearance, or color, itching or tingling, bleeding or weeping, becoming raised) in 1344 individuals in a randomly selected sample of 1075 households; the length of delay in seeking medical advice; the factors associated with either going to a medical practitioner or not going/delaying; and the actions of the medical practitioners when first presented with these signs.  The results indicate that a large proportion of the sample (11.9%, n = 156) had observed signs of melanoma in the previous 12 months.  Of the sample reporting signs that had first appeared in the previous 5 years, only 32% sought medical advice about the signs within the recommended period.  Of the sample either not seeking advice at all or delaying, 49% reported that they thought the sign "wasn't serious/would clear up." Furthermore, 30% of the sample either did not known or underrated the importance of early detection and treatment of lesions.  These results indicate that there is a deficit in the knowledge of the general public about the signs of melanoma, the severity of the disease, and the possible risks associated with delay.
The potential role of postoperative hepatic artery chemotherapy in patients with high-risk hepatomas.  The relationship between operative findings of hepatoma and the postoperative prognosis was studied to clarify indications for adjuvant hepatic arterial chemotherapy after hepatectomy.  The results of adjuvant hepatic arterial chemotherapy using 0.4 mg/kg of doxorubicin and 0.12 mg/kg of mitomycin C and infusion of 5-fluorouracil were reported.  One hundred sixty patients who had undergone hepatectomy for hepatoma were studied.  In the operative findings of hepatoma, with a surgical margin of less than 10 mm, intrahepatic metastasis, tumor embolus in the second or more proximal branch of the portal vein, or lack of capsule formation related to the prognosis were the risk factors for recurrence.  In 132 patients with these risk factors the survival rate of 19 patients with adjuvant arterial chemotherapy was significantly higher than for the 113 patients without it.  Adjuvant hepatic arterial chemotherapy thus may be an effective therapy and should be studied prospectively in patients undergoing hepatectomy for high-risk hepatoma.
Surgical management of 552 carcinomas of the extrahepatic bile ducts (gallbladder and periampullary tumors excluded). Results of the French Surgical Association Survey.  Five hundred fifty-two cases of primary carcinoma of the extrahepatic bile ducts (gallbladder and periampullary tumors excluded) collected from 55 surgical centers were reviewed retrospectively.  Three hundred seven patients (56%) had upper-third lesions (proximal carcinoma), whereas 71 (13%) and 101 (18%), respectively, had middle-third and lower-third bile duct carcinomas.  The remaining patients had diffuse lesions.  Resectability rates were 32% for upper-third localization compared to 47% and 51% for middle-third and lower-third localization, respectively.  The operative mortality rate for proximal carcinomas was significantly lower with resection (16%) compared with palliative surgery (31%) (p less than 0.05).  Overall 1-year survival (operative deaths excluded) was 68% after tumor resection compared to 31% after palliative surgery (p less than 0.001).  Long-term results after surgical resection correlated with local and regional extension of the disease.  The results of this study show that resection of extrahepatic bile duct carcinomas, particularly in an upper-third localization, often is associated with worthwhile long-term survival.
Bronchoalveolar carcinoma: factors affecting survival.  One hundred thirty-four consecutive patients (65 men and 69 women) underwent pulmonary resection for bronchoalveolar carcinoma.  Mean age was 65 years.  Lobectomy was done in 100 patients, pneumonectomy in 10, segmentectomy in 5, and wedge excision in 19.  Only 10 patients had lymph node metastases (7.5%).  The neoplasm was solitary in 111 patients (82.8%); 97 were in stage I, 4 were in stage II, 9 were in stage IIIa, and 1 was in stage IIIb.  There were two operative deaths (1.5%).  Thirty-nine complications occurred in 31 patients.  Median follow-up was 5.1 years.  Recurrent bronchoalveolar carcinoma developed in 45 patients.  Five- and 10-year survival for patients in stage I was 75.2% and 62.0%, respectively.  Survival for patients with T1 N0 M0 neoplasms was identical to expected survival and was 90.5% at 5 years, as compared with 55.4% for patients with T2 N0 M0 disease, only 35.9% for patients with multiple bilateral disease, and 0.0% for patients with bilateral disease (p less than 0.0001).  Other significant factors adversely affecting survival included the presence of signs and symptoms, diffuse malignant invasion, mucin-producing tumors, and the histological absence of scar.  We conclude that bronchoalveolar carcinoma has a unique natural history that is more influenced by local neoplastic processes than by lymph node metastases.  Early aggressive pulmonary resection is safe and offers the potential for cure.  The presence of bilateral cancer, however, is ominous.
Primary cysts and tumors of the mediastinum.  A retrospective analysis was performed on 230 patients with primary cysts and tumors of the mediastinum seen at our institution from January 1944 to April 1989.  We divided these patients into two groups.  Group 1 was seen before 1970 and group 2 was seen from January 1970 to April 1989.  There was a significant increase in the prevalence of malignancy in group 2 (47.2% versus 17.1%; p less than 0.0001) due to an increase in the number of lymphomas (22.6% versus 3.5%; p less than 0.001) and malignant neurogenic tumors (6.8% versus 1.1%; p = 0.0528).  There was a significant increase in the number of malignant tumors in the anterior (59.5% versus 30.9%; p = 0.0022) and paravertebral (28.5% versus 2.8%; p = 0.0027) compartments in group 2.  More patients with these tumors were symptomatic in group 2 (63.6% versus 5%; p = 0.0422).  There was an increase of ancillary diagnostic studies performed to evaluate these tumors (76.0% versus 34.5%; p = 0.0422).  Logistic regression analysis identified date of presentation (p less than 0.005), symptoms (p less than 0.01), size (p less than 0.005), and the anterior mediastinal compartment (p less than 0.005) as preoperative predictors of malignancy.  The surgical approach to these tumors included more median sternotomy (30.1% versus 10.7%; p = 0.0008), anterior mediastinotomy, and cervical mediastinoscopy in group 2 (1.1% versus 17.5%; p = 0.0002).  Long-term results support surgical resection in benign lesions and an aggressive multimodality approach to malignant lesions.
Surgical management of carcinoid heart disease   Metastatic carcinoid tumor is often seen with flushing, diarrhea, and cardiac symptoms--the carcinoid syndrome.  Cardiac failure is often associated with major morbidity and mortality in carcinoid disease.  In this report, a case of successful cardiac valvar surgical intervention has resulted in prolonged alleviation of cardiac symptoms and survival.
Inflammatory breast cancer.  Historically, the prognosis of inflammatory breast cancer has been poor.  We conducted a retrospective review to evaluate the recent Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center experience, to evaluate the role of combination chemotherapy, and to compare the effect of surgery and radiation on local/regional failure.  Fifty-six patients with local/regional inflammatory breast cancer diagnosed between 1975 and 1984 were identified.  All were treated with combination chemotherapy.  Overall 5-year survival was 45% with a 5-year disease-free survival rate of 37%.  Twenty-one patients were treated with induction chemotherapy followed by mastectomy and adjuvant chemotherapy.  Survival and disease-free survival rates were similar to those achieved in patients treated with mastectomy followed by chemotherapy.  Residual cancer was found in all 21 patients treated with induction chemotherapy, with extensive disease present in 18, including six of seven complete responders.  The local/regional failure rate was 34%.
Prognostic significance of carcinoembryonic antigen in colorectal carcinoma. Serum levels before and after resection and before recurrence.  The use of carcinoembryonic antigen was evaluated in 425 patients with a mean follow-up of 48 months.  The preoperative and postoperative carcinoembryonic antigen levels were predictive of recurrence and survival independent of the tumor stage.  In a multivariate regression analysis of age, location, tumor stage, and preoperative and postoperative carcinoembryonic antigen levels, the latter three factors were significant prognostic variables with respect to the adjusted survival.  Recurrent disease was found in 42% of patients, excluding patients with stage IV disease.  The carcinoembryonic antigen level at recurrence was greater than 5 ng/mL in 79% of the patients and in 89% of the intra-abdominal recurrences.  Carcinoembryonic antigen level at recurrence was not predictive of postrecurrence survival except in the subgroup of locoregional disease.  The life span in patients with liver and lung metastases was not influenced by carcinoembryonic antigen level at recurrence.  Preoperative and postoperative carcinoembryonic antigen levels can indicate a poorer prognostic group of patients with colorectal cancer who may benefit from adjuvant treatment.  The carcinoembryonic antigen at recurrence can be used effectively to diagnose intra-abdominal recurrences and project survival after development of local/regional disease.
Prognostic factors in primary retroperitoneal soft-tissue sarcomas.  We analyzed independent treatment variables (age, sex, signs and symptoms, site, size, histopathologic findings, grade, and clinical presentation) and treatment-dependent variables (resectability, type of operation, surgical margins, surgical boundaries, microscopic margins, adjuvant radiotherapy, and adjuvant chemotherapy) in 80 patients with primary retroperitoneal soft-tissue sarcomas admitted from 1982 through 1988.  Both univariate and multivariate analysis of survival and disease-free survival were performed.  The major factor in survival outcome was the ability to completely resect the lesion.  When the 62 patients who underwent complete resection were examined, the only independent prognostic factor for both survival and disease-free survival was grade.  We conclude that completeness of resection and grade of the lesion are primary determinants of survival.  Once all tumor is macroscopically removed, no advantage could be demonstrated by more extensive surgical resection or current adjuvant therapy.
Radioimmunoguided surgery using iodine 125 B72.3 in patients with colorectal cancer.  Preliminary data using B72.3 murine monoclonal antibody labeled with iodine 125 suggested that both clinically apparent as well as occult sites of colorectal cancer could be identified intraoperatively using a hand-held gamma detecting probe.  We report the preliminary data of a multicenter trial of this approach in patients with primary or recurrent colorectal cancer.  One hundred four patients with primary, suspected, or known recurrent colorectal cancer received an intravenous infusion of 1 mg of B72.3 monoclonal antibody radiolabeled with 7.4 x 10 Bq of iodine 125.  Twenty-six patients with primary colorectal cancer and 72 patients with recurrent colorectal cancer were examined.  Using the gamma detecting probe, 78% of the patients had localization of the antibody in their tumor; this included 75% of primary tumor sites and 63% of all recurrent tumor sites; 9.2% of all tumor sites identified represented occult sites detected only with the gamma detecting probe.  The overall sensitivity was 77% and a predictive value of a positive detection was 78%.  A total of 30 occult sites in 26 patients were identified.  In patients with recurrent cancer, the antibody study provided unique data that precluded resection in 10 patients, and in another eight patients it extended the potentially curative procedure.
Radical resection for carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater.  One hundred four consecutive patients who underwent radical resection for ampullary cancer between 1965 and 1989 were retrospectively reviewed.  Frequent clinical findings included jaundice (67%), significant (greater than 10%) weight loss (42%), and anemia (27%).  Eighty-seven patients (84%) underwent a subtotal pancreatectomy, and 17 patients (16%) underwent a total pancreatectomy.  The postoperative mortality was 5.7% (six patients), and reoperation for postoperative complications was required in six patients.  The 5- and 10-year survival rates were 34% and 25%, respectively.  Eight patients died of tumor recurrence more than 5 years after resection.  Patient survival was significantly impaired by microscopic lymphatic invasion, regional nodal metastasis, tumor grade, and the epithelium of origin.  In a multivariate analysis, only microscopic lymphatic invasion significantly reduced patient survival.  Radical resection for ampullary cancer can be performed with a low morbidity and mortality and should remain the procedure of choice for ampullary carcinoma.
5-year results of cisplatin and fluorouracil infusion in head and neck cancer.  As part of the developmental process for the Head and Neck Intergroup trial of adjuvant chemotherapy for advanced resectable head and neck carcinoma, in 1981 the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group, Philadelphia, Pa, conducted two nonrandomized pilot studies using chemotherapy consisting of three courses of cisplatin and fluorouracil infusion.  Chemotherapy was administered prior to surgery in 42 patients (induction) and after surgery in an additional 29 patients (sequential).  The populations were roughly comparable with respect to tumor site and stage.  Twelve of the 42 patients in the induction group and seven of the 29 in the sequential group are alive and with no evidence of disease at the last reported follow-up.  The median survival was 31 months in the sequential group vs 20 months in the induction group.  Only two of the 26 patients with less than a complete clinical response following induction chemotherapy are still alive.  Twenty-seven of the 42 patients who received induction chemotherapy did not undergo surgery as initially planned.  Despite the lack of surgery, at 5 years the survival between the two groups was not significantly different (27% for the induction group vs 23% for the sequential group).
Effective destruction of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) 3 at 100 degrees C using the Semm cold coagulator: 14 years experience   A total of 1628 women with CIN 3 treated with the Semm cold coagulator between 1975 and 1989 was followed primarily by cytology.  The standard suitability criteria for ablation were adhered to except that patients were treated at their first visit when the colposcopist expected that the diagnosis would be no worse than CIN 3.  Overall 97% of the women were treated at their first visit.  In 30 women (2%) the histology was glandular or worse than expected, but 22 of these showed no persistent cervical disease subsequently.  Follow-up was achieved for 87% at 10 years.  In actuarial terms the primary success rate was 95% at 1 year and 92% at 5 years, it was similar for all age groups.  Repeat cold-coagulation for persistent/recurrent CIN 3 was less successful and is not advised.  The outcome for 226 pregnancies established after treatment is known.  The rates for miscarriage, preterm or operative delivery were not increased.  Cold-coagulation of CIN 3 at 100 degrees C as performed by us is as effective as any other treatment and calls into question the need for more expensive practices.
Vaginal epithelial abnormalities in patients with CIN: clinical and pathological features and management.  Of 4147 women who had CIN treated by laser at the Regional Gynaecological Oncology Centre, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Gateshead, 103 (2.5%) had co-existing vaginal epithelial abnormalities.  CIN 3 was the histological diagnosis most often associated with vaginal lesions.  The upper vagina was almost always involved.  In 67% the lesion in the cervix appeared to be confluent with that in the vagina.  Even when the lesions were confluent, biopsies form the cervical and vaginal components did not always show the same grade of intraepithelial neoplasia and in some biopsies they showed different lesions.  Laser treatment appears to be effective for the vaginal lesions and is therefore recommended although, in selected patients, careful follow up alone may suffice.
Carcinoma of the breast: measurement and the management of treatment. I. The value of the data.  This is the first of a series of papers in which we shall explore some insights into the biological changes which accompany the treatment of human tumours which may be obtained through estimation of volume changes in relation to treatment.  We have adopted a working hypothesis that regression slopes reflect the composition of individual tumours and, indirectly, their intrinsic growth rate rather than the effectiveness of treatment.  The breast has proved to be a suitable site for measurement and our interpretation of the results has led to the development of a new style of management for carcinoma of the breast: measurement based sequential therapy (MBST).  In this paper the method of measurement and detailed statistical evaluation of the quality of the data from 262 patients (263 tumours) is presented.  Exponential regression lines have been fitted to describe volume changes in relation to treatment by radiation, chemotherapy and hormones.  A simple classification of steepness of slopes is introduced.
Detection of colorectal liver metastases using intraoperative ultrasonography.  Intraoperative ultrasonography of the liver has been carried out in 99 patients undergoing surgery for colorectal cancer.  Palpation of the liver, preoperative abdominal ultrasonography and computed tomography scanning were also performed in all patients.  Metastases were identified in 26 of the 99 patients (26 per cent).  Intraoperative ultrasonography diagnosed more metastases than palpation, abdominal ultrasonography or CT scanning, identifying metastases in 24 of the 26 patients, including six patients in whom the metastases were not detected by any other technique.  Identification and localization of impalpable liver metastases is therefore possible using intraoperative ultrasonography.
Primary papillary carcinoma of a thyroglossal duct cyst: report of a case and literature review.  Thyroglossal duct cysts are the most common anomaly in thyroid development.  They are twice as frequent as branchial cleft abnormalities and, in children, are second only to enlarged cervical lymph nodes as the cause of neck mass.  Generally, duct cysts are benign, but 1 per cent of cases may be malignant.  From the world literature, 114 cases of malignant thyroglossal cysts were available for review.  With the addition of our own case, we discuss 115 instances of duct cysts.  The different types of neoplasia described included thyroid papillary carcinoma in 81.7 per cent, mixed papillary-follicular carcinoma in 6.9 per cent, squamous cell carcinoma in 5.2 per cent, follicular and adenocarcinoma in 1.7 per cent each, and malignant struma, epidermoid carcinoma and anaplastic carcinoma in 0.9 per cent each.  Of the 115 cases surveyed, 35 thyroid glands were examined microscopically; of these, four (11.4 per cent) contained malignant foci.  Whether these are primary malignancies of the thyroglossal duct cysts or metastases is discussed.
The value of radioimmunoguided surgery in first and second look laparotomy for colorectal cancer.  Radioimmunoguided surgery (RIGS) using an anti-CEA (A5B7) monoclonal antibody has been assessed in 52 patients (43 primary excisions and nine second look procedures) undergoing surgery for colorectal carcinoma.  The antibody localized in 97.8 percent of primary tumours and in 88.8 percent of the principal tumor in second look procedures.  Additional information concerning the extent of primary tumor was obtained in 11 of 43 patients (25.5 percent) undergoing excision of primary carcinoma and five of nine patients (55 percent) in the second look series.  Incorrect information was obtained about the extent of the primary tumour in six patients (11.3 percent), whereas no incorrect information was obtained during second look procedures.  RIGS correctly predicted the subsequent Dukes' staging in 77 percent of first look cases (sensitivity 65 percent, specificity 90 percent), although accurate identification of individual nodes was impossible.  The technique influenced the surgical procedure performed in 2 of 43 cases (4.6 percent) in primary surgery and in three of nine patients undergoing second look laparotomy (33 percent).  RIGS in primary colorectal carcinoma may provide additional information concerning extent of locally advanced tumors in particular and the principle that the subsequent surgery may be influenced has been established.  The technique appears to have a greater role in second look procedures where it may help determine the extent of recurrent tumour.  Larger follow-up series are required to define how the additional information provided by this technique may best be exploited.
Nuclear shape as a prognostic discriminant in colorectal carcinoma.  In search for a more reliable prognostic discriminant, a retrospective analysis of 100 cases of colorectal carcinoma having undergone curative resection and followed for at least 5 years were assessed by nuclear morphometry.  Each case was staged according to the Dukes' classification as well as graded histologically.  For all patients in this series, the perimeter, area, and nuclear shape factor of 50 interphase nuclei were determined for each carcinoma.  The information was obtained through the use of an image analysis system by tracing the nuclear profiles (magnification 1000x) as digitized on a video screen.  The nuclear shape factor was defined as the degree of circularity of the nucleus, a perfect circle recorded as 1.0.  A nuclear shape factor greater than 0.84 was associated with poor outcome.  Multiple regression models showed that the single nuclear parameter of the shape factor was the most highly significant predictor of survival (P less than 0.0001).  This variable remained highly significant even when corrected for sex, age, histologic grade, and Dukes' classification.  These findings indicate that a nuclear shape factor greater than or equal to 0.84 as determined by nuclear morphometry is an independent morphometric nuclear variable of great importance in the prognosis of large bowel carcinoma.
Primary de novo adenocarcinoma of the colon measuring 8 mm in diameter with lymph node metastases. Report of a case.  Colonic adenocarcinomas measuring less than 10 mm are rare.  Herein, we report a carcinoma measuring 8 mm in diameter associated with subserosal extension through a "locus minoris resistentiae" and metastases to lymph nodes, an association not previously reported.  No residual adenomatous tissue was found, suggesting a de novo carcinoma.
Development and characterization of a new, highly specific antibody to the human chorionic gonadotropin-beta fragment.  In addition to high concentrations of hCG, pregnancy urine contains even higher concentrations of a fragment of the hCG beta-subunit.  This biologically inactive material complicates immunological measurement of hCG, since it cross-reacts with many polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies to the hCG beta-subunit that are employed for assays of hCG in urine.  Although we and others have developed antibodies to this fragment, specific measurement of the fragment in the presence of free hCG beta has remained difficult due to intrinsic cross-reactivity of these antibodies with the intact hCG beta.  Rather than attempt to increase specificity by assay optimization, we developed a new, highly specific monoclonal antibody, designated B210, which cross-reacts less than 0.1% with the free hCG beta-subunit in both liquid and solid phase immunoassay formats.  We have used this new monoclonal antibody in immunoradiometric assays to measure specifically the hCG beta fragment in urine throughout pregnancy as well as in the sera of two individuals with cancers producing the hCG beta-subunit.  We discovered that the hCG beta fragment can bind three monoclonal antibodies simultaneously, indicating that although the epitope for antibody B210 is a new determinant exposed on the hCG beta fragment and not on intact hCG or on free hCG beta-subunit, the hCG beta fragment retains at least two other hCG beta-related epitopes intact, i.e.  those that bind monoclonal antibodies B108 and B201.
Calcium transport by plasma membranes from a glucose-responsive rat insulinoma.  Inside-out plasma membrane vesicles from a glucose-responsive rat insulinoma showed an ATP- and Mg2(+)-dependent uptake of Ca2+.  The Km (concentration giving half-maximal activity) for Ca2+ was 60 nM.  In the presence of 0.4 microM free Ca2+, the Km for ATP was 15 microM, and the Km for Mg2+ was 4 microM.  Glucose (30 mM) decreased Ca2+ uptake by 50%, while other insulin secretagogues had no effect, except for glyceraldehyde, which stimulated Ca2+ uptake.  Calmodulin increased the uptake of Ca2+, while trifluoperazine and vanadate inhibited the uptake.  The Ca2(+)- and Mg2(+)-dependent ATPase from this tumor has a 10- to 20-fold higher requirement for Ca2+, which suggests that this enzyme is not responsible for Ca2+ transport, rather, Ca2+ transport activity represents only a small fraction of the total Ca2(+)-ATPase activity.  The physiological importance of Ca2+ transport in insulin secretion is evident from the inhibition of Ca2+ uptake by glucose, which leads to a decrease in Ca2+ efflux from the cell.  This inhibition would lead to an increase in intracellular free Ca2+ and insulin release.
Transcriptional regulation of ferritin messenger ribonucleic acid levels by insulin in cultured rat glioma cells.  Recent data have shown that ferritin, a ubiquitous protein, has a role as a regulator of cellular differentiation.  In the present study we have investigated the expression of ferritin mRNAs in cultured C6 cells, a rat glioma cell line, in response to insulin, which has an important role in cellular growth and differentiation.  Insulin stimulated steady state levels of both ferritin heavy chain and ferritin light chain mRNAs.  An increase in the level of ferritin heavy or light chain mRNA was detected after 2 h of incubation with insulin, and a plateau was reached after 48 h for heavy chain mRNA and after 72 h for light chain mRNA.  The responses were dose-dependent and were maximal at 100 nM for both mRNAs.  Treatment of cells with actinomycin-D showed that insulin had no effect on the posttranscriptional stability of these mRNAs.  Actinomycin-D inhibited insulin-induced accumulation of both mRNAs, suggesting transcriptional stimulation of ferritin genes by insulin.  A nuclear run-on assay showed that the insulin-induced increase in ferritin heavy chain mRNA was due to an increase in the rate of gene transcription.  We also demonstrated that insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) increased ferritin heavy and light chain mRNA levels in a dose-dependent fashion, and that the maximum effect was obtained at a concentration of 10 nM on both mRNA levels.  IGF-I was not only 10-fold more potent, but the absolute level of maximum stimulation was also about 2-fold greater than that for insulin.  The combination of insulin (100 nM) and IGF-I (10 nM) showed no additive effect.  The results suggested that the ferritin heavy and light chain genes are transcriptionally regulated by insulin and influenced by IGF-I.
Regulation of insulin, epidermal growth factor, and transforming growth factor-alpha levels by growth factor-degrading enzymes.  The mechanisms by which growth factors are degraded and the role this process plays in the regulation of cell growth are not well understood.  Insulin degradation is believed to be mediated by a specific metalloprotease, insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE).  We have previously shown that IDE can also degrade transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF alpha), but not epidermal growth factor (EGF), in vitro.  This selectivity was surprising, since TGF alpha and EGF are structurally similar and bind to the same receptor with comparable affinities.  Using a spectrum of protease inhibitors, we have now analyzed the degradation of TGF alpha, EGF, and insulin by human hepatoma HepG2 cells.  The results suggest that bacitracin-sensitive metalloproteases are involved in the degradation of TGF alpha and EGF as well as insulin, and that the degradation of TGF alpha, but not EGF, is mediated in part by IDE.  Inhibiting the activity of these metalloproteases decreased growth factor depletion, suggesting that these enzymes play an important role in the control of extracellular growth factor levels.  The existence of separate degradative pathways for EGF and TGF alpha may explain how the two factors exert differential effects in some systems, and degradation of TGF alpha by IDE would provide a possible mechanism for interaction between the insulin and TGF alpha/EGF signalling systems.
Effects of hepatitis B virus, alcohol drinking, cigarette smoking and familial tendency on hepatocellular carcinoma.  Independent and interactive effects related to the development of hepatocellular carcinoma were assessed using a community-based case-control study for hepatitis B virus, habitual alcohol drinking, cigarette smoking, peanut consumption and history of hepatocellular carcinoma among the immediate family.  All 200 male newly diagnosed hepatocellular carcinoma patients were recruited consecutively through the period of study as the case group from two teaching medical centers in northern and southern Taiwan.  Healthy community residents matched one-to-one with cases on age, sex, ethnic group and residential area were selected as the control group.  The carrier status of HBsAg and HBeAg was determined by blind radioimmunoassays, and other risk factors were obtained through standardized interviews according to a structured questionnaire.  Conditional logistic regression analysis showed a significant association between hepatocellular carcinoma and the carrier status of HBsAg and HBeAg with an odds ratio of 16.7 and 56.5, respectively, for carriers of HBsAg alone and for carriers of both HBsAg and HBeAg.  There was a dose-response relationship between cigarette smoking and hepatocellular carcinoma with an odds ratio of 1.1, 1.5 and 2.6, respectively, for those who smoked 1 to 10, 11 to 20 and more than 20 cigarettes a day.  A significant association with hepatocellular carcinoma was also observed for the habitual alcohol consumer with an odds ratio of 3.4.  Those whose immediate family had a history of hepatocellular carcinoma were more likely to have the disease develop, with an odds ratio of 4.6.  However, the frequency of peanut consumption was not significantly associated with hepatocellular carcinoma.
Usefulness of pulsed Doppler ultrasound in detection of angiographically evident recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma after arterial embolization treatment.  Because hepatocellular carcinoma treated by transcatheter arterial embolization often regains its size, routine follow-up is necessary.  The usefulness of pulsed Doppler ultrasound for detection of this type of recurrence was compared with ultrasonography and computed tomography in 21 such hepatocellular carcinomas.  Of 15 hepatocellular carcinomas diagnosed by angiography as showing recurrence, four were detected with ultrasonography and five were detected with computed tomography.  Doppler signals were obtained in the peripheral portions corresponding to tumor vessels or stains on angiograms in 14 of these 15 hepatocellular carcinomas, but they were undetectable in six hepatocellular carcinomas with no recurrence.  All signals disappeared after transcatheter arterial embolization.  One false-negative hepatocellular carcinoma with pulsed Doppler ultrasound showed faint tumor stains on angiograms; these were also negative on ultrasonography and computed tomography.  Pulsed Doppler ultrasound may be superior to ultrasonography and computed tomography as a routine procedure to detect the recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma treated by transcatheter arterial embolization.
Acquired cisplatin resistance in human ovarian cancer cells is associated with enhanced repair of cisplatin-DNA lesions and reduced drug accumulation.  Studies were undertaken to investigate acquired resistance to cisplatin in human ovarian cancer cells.  The cell lines A2780 and A2780/CP70 were studied to assess their respective characteristics of drug accumulation and efflux, cytosolic inactivation of drug, and DNA repair.  All experiments were performed using 1-h drug exposures.  The A2780/CP70 cell line was 13-fold more resistant to cisplatin than A2780 cells.  When studied at their respective IC50 doses, drug accumulation rates were similar for the two cell lines.  However, the resistant cell line was twofold more efficient at effluxing drug, which was associated with reduced total drug accumulation for equivalent micromolar drug exposures.  At equivalent levels of total cellular drug accumulation, the two cell lines formed the same levels of cisplatin-DNA damage, suggesting that cytosolic inactivation of drug does not contribute to the differential in resistance between these cell lines.  Resistant cells were also twofold more efficient at repairing cisplatin-DNA lesions in cellular DNA and in transfected plasmid DNA.  We conclude that in these paired cell lines, alterations in drug uptake/efflux and in DNA repair are the major contributing factors to acquired resistance to cisplatin.
Biology of basal cell carcinoma (Part I).  Basal cell carcinoma is the most common malignancy in humans.  Although rarely metastatic, it is capable of significant local destruction and disfigurement.  This two-part article reviews the current understanding of basal cell carcinoma biology.  Part I examines significant clinical, histologic, and ultrastructural features that relate to invasive potential.  Genetic characteristics, including tumor growth rate, chromosomal abnormalities, and oncogene presence, are discussed, and expression of important cell and matrix proteins, including keratin, fibronectin, and HLA antigens, are reviewed.  Further topics to be explored in Part II include host immunologic responses, theories of pathogenesis, and valuable second-line therapeutic regimens for treatment of multiple cancers.
Late metastases of cutaneous melanoma: case report and literature review.  The development of delayed metastases, although rare, is well documented in patients with invasive cutaneous melanoma.  Only 24 cases, including ours, are clearly documented in the literature.  We describe a 56-year-old woman who had an acral lentiginous melanoma of the right hand (thickness 1.2 mm).  Thirteen years after excision and postoperative irradiation, a subcutaneous metastasis developed in the right arm.  One year later the patient died with disseminated bone metastases.  This case, as with most of those with delayed metastases, has typical features: female sex; location at a site other than the back, arm, neck, or scalp; and primary tumor thickness between 1.2 and 2.5 mm.
Multiple granular cell tumors associated with giant speckled lentiginous nevus and nevus flammeus in a child.  We describe an 11-year-old girl in whom multiple cutaneous granular cell tumors were associated with a giant speckled lentiginous nevus and an extensive nevus flammeus.  An association between granular cell tumors and pigmented skin lesions has been reported twice previously and supports a neural origin for these tumors.  An abnormality of neural crest development is proposed to explain the coexistence of three uncommon and unusually extensive cutaneous disorders in this patient.  This case may represent a further variant of phakomatosis pigmentovascularis.
Abnormal epidermal changes after argon laser treatment.  A 26-year-old woman with a congenital port-wine stain on the forehead was treated three times at 2-month intervals with an argon laser.  Six months after the last treatment, moderate blanching and mild scaling confined to the treated area was observed.  A biopsy specimen of the treated area revealed a significant decrease in ectatic vessels.  However, epidermal changes similar to those of actinic keratosis with disorganized cell layers and marked cytologic abnormalities were seen.  Analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes for a defect in DNA repair was negative.  Multiple, argon laser-induced photothermal effects may be responsible for the changes observed in our case and may lead to premalignant epidermal transformation.
Systematic computer-aided search of optimal staging system for colorectal cancer.  Two hundred and ninety-eight patients with curatively resected colorectal cancer were classified into 12 categories according to the depth of tumour penetration (T1-T4), and lymph node status (N0-N2).  Using a computer, these categories were grouped into 2-12 stages in every possible combination, so a total of 146,975 logical classifications were generated.  The optimal model was selected for each group of classifications with equal stage number, thus giving the greatest prognostic information on 5-year survival according to the Akaike criterion.  The results showed that (1) 13% of the total classifications, including 85% of the 3-stage classifications, were better than the Dukes system in predicting our patients' outcomes; (2) the T-level was a stage-determinant even more important than the N-level; and (3) major changes in prognosis occurred at more advanced stages than the classical "turning points".  We conclude that in order to find an optimal staging of cancer, systematic computer-aided search through all the possible classifications is necessary, using the appropriate database.
Usefulness of epidurally evoked cortical potential monitoring during cervicomedullary glioma surgery.  This report describes a patient with an intramedullary ependymoma at the region of the cervicomedullary junction in whom there was an abolition of somatosensory evoked potentials following median nerve stimulation.  During intraoperative monitoring of cortical potentials elicited by epidural cervical cord stimulation, the tumor was removed.  Posterior epidural stimulation appeared to depolarize more ascending fibers than did stimulation of a single peripheral nerve.  We recommend that, in cases of operations in this vital area, epidurally evoked cortical potentials be monitored intraoperatively.
The influence of drug interval on the effect of methotrexate and fluorouracil in the treatment of advanced colorectal cancer   The importance of the interval between methotrexate (MTX) and fluorouracil (5-FU) was studied in 168 patients with previously untreated, measurable, advanced colorectal cancer.  They were randomized to receive MTX 200 mg/m2, followed by 5-FU 600 mg/m2 either 24 hours (arm A) or 1 hour (arm B) after MTX.  All patients received leucovorin (LV) 24 hours after MTX, 10 mg/m2 orally every 6 hours for six doses.  The regimen was repeated every 2 weeks, with 5-FU escalation as tolerated.  Arm A was significantly better than arm B with respect to overall response rate (29% v 14.5%, P = .026), time to progression (TTP; median, 9.9 months v 5.9 months, P = .009), and survival (median, 15.3 months v 11.4 months, P = .003).  Significant differences between arms were not found in response rate, median TTP, or median survival for the subgroup of patients with rectal primaries who comprised 20% of the patients in each arm.  Significant factors prognostic for survival were performance status and number of metastases, as well as treatment.  Age did not influence survival.  Toxicity was similar in both arms and was primarily gastrointestinal.  More mucositis was seen in arm A.  There were four toxic deaths secondary to neutropenia and infection (one from arm A and three from arm B) and three other deaths (two from arm A and one from arm B) that were possibly drug-related.  The combination of MTX with LV rescue and 5-FU is an active regimen in advanced colorectal cancer; its efficacy is increased in colon, but not rectal cancer, when the interval between MTX and 5-FU is long (24 hours) rather than short (1 hour).
Clonogenic growth in vitro: an independent biologic prognostic factor in ovarian carcinoma   A retrospective analysis was performed to investigate the prognostic value of growth in a human tumor clonogenic assay system for 84 ovarian cancer patients.  A significant difference in survival probability (determined by the method of Kaplan-Meier) was found by univariate analysis between patients with ovarian carcinoma whose tumors manifested clonogenic growth (defined as growth of greater than or equal to five colonies per plate) and patients whose tumors did not grow.  Clonogenic growth in vitro was associated with worse prognosis (P = .007, log-rank test).  A number of generally accepted prognostic factors, International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) stage (P = .003), residual tumor mass (P less than .001), and grade (P = .011), were also of prognostic importance in our patient population.  Multivariate analysis, based on the Cox regression model, identified clonogenic growth as a significant independent prognostic parameter in ovarian carcinoma (P = .031), in addition to the conventional risk factors.  Estimation of survival of individual patients was best accomplished by combining the factors of residual tumor mass (P less than .05), age (P less than .01), and clonogenic growth (P less than .05) (in sequence of decreasing potential of risk).
Second-line platinum therapy in patients with ovarian cancer previously treated with cisplatin.  In an effort to critically define the incidence and clinical characteristics of secondary responses to cisplatin-based therapy in patients with ovarian cancer previously treated with a cisplatin-based program, a retrospective review was undertaken of patients at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center who received greater than or equal to two cisplatin/carboplatin-based programs.  Eighty-two patients were identified who met the entry criteria of having had a cisplatin-free interval (CFI) of more than 4 months between the completion of their first regimen and the institution of a second cisplatin/carboplatin program.  Of the 72 assessable patients (10 had no measurable disease, and a laparotomy was not performed to assess response), 31 (43%) responded, including 10 surgically defined complete responses (S-CRs).  The overall response rates (and S-CR rate), based on duration of CFI, were 5 to 12 months, 27% (5%); 13 to 24 months, 33% (11%); and more than 24 months, 59% (22%).  Twenty-nine patients (35%) received noncisplatin/carboplatin-containing treatments between the cisplatin programs.  Patients without any treatment for more than 24 months from the completion of their initial therapy experienced a 77% (17 of 22) response rate and a 32% (seven of 22) S-CR rate.  In conclusion, secondary responses to cisplatin/carboplatin-based treatment are common in patients with ovarian cancer who have previously responded to the agents and increase in frequency with greater distance from the initial therapy.
Treatment of relapsed non-Hodgkin's lymphomas with dexamethasone, high-dose cytarabine, and cisplatin before marrow transplantation.  Combination chemotherapy is capable of curing many patients with newly diagnosed intermediate- and high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHL), but treatment of relapsed NHL remains problematic.  Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) offers the best chance for disease-free survival, but interim chemotherapy is often necessary while awaiting BMT, especially for patients with bulky disease.  We report here 39 patients (median age, 44 years) who failed primary therapy with doxorubicin-based regimens and subsequently were treated with one to six cycles of dexamethasone, 40 mg intravenous (IV) every day on days 1 to 4, cisplatin 100 mg/m2 by continuous infusion on day 1, and cytarabine 2 g/m2 IV every 12 hours x two doses on day 2 (DHAP) before the planned BMT.  Histologies included 16 diffuse large-cell, six diffuse mixed, five diffuse small-cleaved, four lymphoblastic, and eight other.  Twenty-eight patients had stage IV disease, 13 had B symptoms, and 20 had an elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH).  Patients had been treated with a median of three previous chemotherapy regimens.  Sixty-one percent of patients had high tumor burdens according to the MD Anderson criteria.  Objective responses to DHAP were seen in 26 patients (67%) including nine complete responses (CRs) (23%) and 17 partial responses (PRs) (44%), and responses lasted a median of 7.5 months.  Myelosuppression was the major toxicity, but there were no treatment-related deaths.  To date, 17 patients have undergone subsequent BMT with a projected 3-year disease-free survival of 15%.  We conclude that the DHAP regimen is effective short-term salvage therapy for relapsed NHL patients, but the long-term prognosis of multiply relapsed patients remains poor.
Second primary cancer following Hodgkin's disease: updated results of an Italian multicentric study.  The risk of second primary cancer (SPC) was evaluated in 947 patients treated for Hodgkin's disease (HD) during the period January 1969 to December 1979.  The median follow-up of this series was 10.5 years (range, 9 to 19).  Treatment categories included radiotherapy (RT) alone (115 patients, 12%), chemotherapy (CHT) alone (161 patients, 17%), combined RT plus CHT (381 patients, 40%), and salvage treatment for resistant or relapsing HD (290 patients, 30.6%).  Fifty-six SPCs were observed, occurring between 1 and 17 years from initial treatment.  Among these, secondary acute nonlymphoid leukemia (s-ANLL) was the most frequent SPC (23 cases).  Secondary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (s-NHL) occurred in 5 patients, whereas a secondary solid tumor (s-ST) was observed in 28 patients.  The calculated actuarial risk (+/- SE) of developing SPC was 5.0% (+/- 0.9%) and 23.1% (+/- 5.8%) at 10 and 19 years, respectively.  Concerning treatment modalities and s-ANLL risk, no cases were observed in the radiotherapy group, whereas CHT plus RT and salvage groups showed the highest actuarial risk.  This was, in fact, at 10 and 19 years, 3.1% (+/- 0.9%) and 8.1% (+/- 4.0%) in the former group, and 1.8% (+/- 1.0%) and 16% (+/- 9.0%) in the latter.  A statistically significant difference was observed when the CHT plus RT group was compared with CHT and RT groups (P = .04).  Concerning the relationships with chemotherapeutic regimens, 12 s-ANLL cases occurred in the mechlorethamine, vincristine, procarbazine, and prednisone (MOPP) plus RT group, and only one case in the group receiving doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine (ABVD) plus RT.  A statistically significant difference of s-ANLL actuarial risk was found comparing patients receiving MOPP plus RT to all other treatment groups (P = .04).  With respect to s-ST, the actuarial risk at 10 and 19 years was 2.0% (+/- 0.6%) and 13.0% (+/- 3.8%), respectively.  No significant differences were found among groups treated with different modalities.  These data were confirmed by a multivariate analysis, which indicated treatment modality and age as independent variables for s-ANLL and s-ST development, respectively.  Based on the prolonged follow-up analysis, the actuarial SPC risk at 10 years hereby reported should reflect the real SPC incidence in our series.
The pattern of intrathoracic Hodgkin's disease assessed by computed tomography.  Computed tomography (CT) was used to define the sites of intrathoracic abnormality in Hodgkin's disease, determine a pattern of progression of disease in the thorax, and establish the place of this pattern of spread in the differential diagnosis of thoracic abnormalities.  One hundred eight patients with newly diagnosed Hodgkin's disease were studied by chest CT.  Seventy-seven patients had intrathoracic abnormalities.  The pattern seen was one of contiguous spread from the anterior mediastinal/paratracheal area to the other mediastinal lymph node groups (aortopulmonary, subcarinal, posterior mediastinal, and internal mammary), to the hila, and then into the lung by extension or as discrete nodules.  Involvement of the pleura, pericardium, or chest wall occurred only after the anterior mediastinal/paratracheal mass had enlarged to greater than 30% of the thoracic diameter.  The probability that this pattern of contiguous lymph node spread occurred by chance alone was very small.  Hodgkin's disease spreads from the anterior mediastinal/paratracheal area in a contiguous manner.  Exceptions are unusual enough that when they occur, diagnoses other than Hodgkin's disease are more likely.
Multiple myeloma: VMCP/VBAP alternating combination chemotherapy is not superior to melphalan and prednisone even in high-risk patients.  The efficacy of alternating vincristine, melphalan (M), cyclophosphamide, prednisone/vincristine, carmustine, doxorubicin, and prednisone (VMCP/VBAP) polychemotherapy was compared with the M and prednisone (MP) regimen as induction treatment in multiple myeloma (MM).  Three hundred four MM patients entered this study between March 1983 and July 1986; the analysis was performed in December 1989.  The treatment groups did not show significant differences with respect to major prognostic factors.  Median overall survival was 33.8 months.  In the VMCP/VBAP and MP arms, after 12 induction chemotherapy cycles, 59.0% and 47.3% (P less than .068) of the patients achieved an M component reduction greater than 50%.  No significant difference was observed in the two treatment arms in terms of remission duration (21.3 v 19.6 months, P less than .66) and survival (31.6 v 37.0 months, P less than .28).  Patients younger than 65 years did not show any advantage from the alternating polychemotherapy.  At diagnosis, the plasma cell labeling index (LI) and serum beta-2 microglobulin (beta 2-m) were evaluated in 173 and 183 patients, respectively.  A significantly reduced survival was observed for patients with LI greater than or equal to 2% (16.4 months) or beta 2-m greater than or equal to 6 mg/L (20.4 months).  Even in these poor-risk subgroups, VMCP/VBAP was not superior to MP.
A phase I clinical, plasma, and cellular pharmacology study of gemcitabine.  A novel deoxycytidine analog, gemcitabine (2',2'-difluorodeoxycytidine [dFdC]), has been studied in a phase I clinical and pharmacology trial.  Doses ranging from 10 to 1,000 mg/m2 were administered over 30 minutes weekly times 3 weeks every 4 weeks.  The maximum-tolerated dose (MTD) was 790 mg/m2.  The dose-limiting toxicity was myelosuppression, with thrombocytopenia and anemia quantitatively more important than granulocytopenia.  Nonhematologic toxicity was minimal.  Two responses in patients with adenocarcinomas of the colon and lung were documented.  The maximum dFdC plasma concentration, reached after 15 minutes of infusion, was proportional to the total dose administered.  Elimination, due mainly to deamination, was rapid (terminal half-life [t1/2], 8.0 minutes) and dose independent.  The deamination product 2',2'-difluorodeoxyuridine (dFdU) was eliminated with biphasic kinetics characterized by a long terminal phase (t1/2, 14 hours); it was the sole metabolite detected in urine.  The concentration of dFdC 5'-triphosphate in circulating mononuclear cells increased in proportion to the dFdC dose at infusions between 35 and 250 mg/m2.  No further increment in dFdC 5'-triphosphate (dFdCTP) was observed at higher doses, which resulted in plasma dFdC concentrations greater than 20 mumol/L (350 to 1,000 mg/m2), suggesting saturation of dFdC 5'-phosphate accumulation.  The recommended dose for phase II clinical trials in solid tumors is 790 mg/m2/wk.
Interleukin-2: prospects for lymphocyte-mediated destruction of pediatric malignancies.  Immunologic therapy of cancer was speculated on at the turn of the century.  In animals, in vitro, and most recently in patients, irrefutable evidence has been obtained that lymphocyte responses can have a reproducible and beneficial antitumor effect.  These results indicate that "biologic response modification" may truly become a fourth modality for cancer treatment, to be integrated into the standard approaches of radiation, chemotherapy, and surgery.  To what extent these immune approaches may enable eradication of microscopic amounts of residual diseases in children who would otherwise have a recurrence of their malignancies remains the critical issue for testing over the next decade.  Enthusiasm regarding this approach is abundant, but critical evaluation of all clinical trials is essential to best focus these mechanisms into effective therapy.
Alternating hepatic intra-arterial floxuridine and fluorouracil: a less toxic regimen for treatment of liver metastases from colorectal cancer.  Hepatic intra-arterial (HIA) infusion of floxuridine (FUDR) via an implanted pump has shown promise in the treatment of colorectal cancer metastasized to the liver.  However, the potential benefit of this therapy may be offset by the high incidence of treatment-limiting biliary toxicity.  Although weekly HIA bolus of fluorouracil (5-FU) is effective against metastatic colorectal cancer to the liver with no biliary toxicity, it is limited by systemic side effects.  In December 1986, we began a phase II trial of alternating HIA FUDR and 5-FU via the implanted pump in an attempt to extend the duration of treatment by obviating the limiting biliary (FUDR) and systemic (5-FU) drug toxic effects.  Patients received continuous HIA FUDR at 0.1 mg/kg of body weight per day on days 1 through 8 followed by an HIA bolus of 5-FU at 15 mg/kg given via the pump sideport on days 15, 22, and 29, with the cycle repeated every 35 days.  Sixty-eight patients were enrolled in this trial, and 64 were fully evaluable.  Of the 64 patients, 30 (47%) previously had received chemotherapy.  Major response (complete response plus partial response) was observed in 32 (50%) of 64 patients, and the median survival from pump implantation in all patients was 22.4 months.  In contrast to the experience with the single-agent HIA FUDR regimen, no patient had treatment terminated because of drug toxicity.  Alternating HIA FUDR and 5-FU has efficacy similar to that of HIA FUDR given alone, but when closely monitored and adjusted appropriately, is not associated with toxic effects requiring treatment termination.
Preferential localization of human adherent lymphokine-activated killer cells in tumor microcirculation.  The efficacy of adoptive immunotherapy for solid tumors with lymphokine-activated effector cells presumably depends on the ability of these cells to localize adequately in tumor tissues.  We present here the first quantitative study of the in vivo movement of fluorescently labeled adherent lymphokine-activated killer (A-LAK) cells.  These cells were injected intra-arterially along with low-dose interleukin-2 into normal (mature granulation) tissue and an implant of VX2 carcinoma grown in the rabbit ear chamber.  A small proportion of A-LAK cells accumulated preferentially in the tumor microcirculation in vivo because of an increased frequency of long-term adhesive interactions with the tumor vasculature.  Stasis of blood flow in the tumor vasculature was observed 1 to 2 days after injection.  Subsequent necrosis of the tumors was observed, along with diffuse infiltrates of lymphocytes, monocytes, and granulocytes in the interstitial space within the tumor.  Development of necrosis despite low ratios of effector cells to target cells suggests that in addition to direct cytotoxicity, the response to adoptive immunotherapy is mediated via the tumor vasculature.  This novel mechanism for adoptive immunotherapy must be taken into account in the development of improved strategies for cancer treatment.
Cancer in populations living near nuclear facilities. A survey of mortality nationwide and incidence in two states.  Reports from the United Kingdom have described increases in leukemia and lymphoma among young persons living near certain nuclear installations.  Because of concerns raised by these reports, a mortality survey was conducted in populations living near nuclear facilities in the United States.  All facilities began service before 1982.  Over 900,000 cancer deaths occurred from 1950 through 1984 in 107 counties with or near nuclear installations.  Each study county was matched for comparison to three "control counties" in the same region.  There were 1.8 million cancer deaths in the 292 control counties during the 35 years studied.  Deaths due to leukemia or other cancers were not more frequent in the study counties than in the control counties.  For childhood leukemia mortality, the relative risk comparing the study counties with their controls before plant start-up was 1.08, while after start-up it was 1.03.  For leukemia mortality at all ages, the relative risks were 1.02 before start-up and 0.98 after.  For counties in two states, cancer incidence data were also available.  For one facility, the standardized registration ratio for childhood leukemia was increased significantly after start-up.  However, the increase also antedated the operation of this facility.  The study is limited by the correlational approach and the large size of the geographic areas (counties) used.  It does not prove the absence of any effect.  If, however, any excess cancer risk was present in US counties with nuclear facilities, it was too small to be detected with the methods employed.
Esophageal ultrasound and the preoperative staging of carcinoma of the esophagus.  Esophageal ultrasound allows the esophageal wall to be viewed as five discrete layers.  Lymph nodes are easily identified, and their size, shape, margin, and internal structure can be assessed.  This provides an alternative method of preoperative (clinical) evaluation of the primary tumor [T] and the regional lymph nodes [N] of patients with carcinoma of the esophagus.  Esophageal ultrasound was attempted in the clinical staging of 28 patients with carcinoma of the esophagus.  Six patients (21%) were not assessed because of the inability to pass the esophageal ultrasound probe through the malignant stricture.  The staging system for carcinoma of the esophagus developed by the International Union Against Cancer and the American Joint Committee on Cancer was used.  Twenty-two patients had the true T determined by pathologic review of the resected esophagus.  Esophageal ultrasound correctly identified T in 13 patients (59% accuracy).  In four patients (18%) the disease was overstaged by esophageal ultrasound; all these patients had early T1 tumors confined to the submucosa.  In five patients (23%) the disease was understaged by esophageal ultrasound; all of these patients had advanced tumors (four T3 and one T4) that invaded beyond the esophageal wall.  Seven of the nine incorrect esophageal ultrasound determinations were called T2 (three T1, three T3, one T4), which suggests that the borders of the muscularis propria require careful attention when evaluated by esophageal ultrasound.  Twenty patients had the true N determined by pathologic review of the resected specimen.  Esophageal ultrasound correctly identified N in 14 patients (70% accuracy).  Three patients were falsely identified as having N1 disease and three were falsely identified as having N0 disease.  The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value for N assessment by esophageal ultrasound were 70%.  Esophageal ultrasound provides an alternative method of visualization of the esophageal wall and regional lymph nodes.  Our early experience shows promise for esophageal ultrasound in the clinical staging of carcinoma of the esophagus.
Lack of effect of pregnancy on outcome of melanoma. For The World Health Organisation Melanoma Programme   To determine the effect of pregnancy on prognosis in melanoma we investigated 388 women treated for stage 1 primary cutaneous disease during their childbearing years.  85 women had been treated before any pregnancy, 92 during pregnancy, 143 after they had completed all pregnancies, and 68 between pregnancies.  Women who had received treatment while pregnant had primary tumours of significantly greater thickness than did those in the other three groups (p = 0.002).  Other possible confounding factors (site, age, parity) did not differ between the groups.  Once tumour thickness was controlled for, survival rate of women in whom melanoma was diagnosed and treated while they were pregnant did not differ from that in the other three groups.  Cox regression analysis showed no differences between the three groups of women who were not pregnant at diagnosis.  Women with melanoma should be advised about pregnancy on the basis of thickness and site of tumour and evidence of vascular spread, and not hormonal status.
Activation of Epstein-Barr virus latent genes protects human B cells from death by apoptosis.  Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a human herpesvirus, establishes a persistent asymptomatic infection of the circulating B-lymphocyte pool.  The mechanism of virus persistence is not understood but, given the limited lifespan of most B cells in vivo, it seems most likely that EBV-infected cells must gain access to the long-lived memory B-cell pool.  Here we show in an in vitro system that EBV, through expression of the full set of eight virus-coded 'latent' proteins, can protect human B cells from programmed cell death (apoptosis), the deletion mechanism which normally restricts entry into memory.  We have found that EBV-positive Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) cell clones retaining the original tumour cell phenotype and expressing only one of the virus latent proteins, the nuclear antigen EBNA 1, are extremely sensitive to apoptosis; in this respect they resemble the tumour's normal cell of origin found in the germinal centres of lymphoid tissue.  By contrast, isogenic BL cell clones which have activated expression of all eight EBV latent proteins are resistant to the induction of apoptosis.  The EBV latent proteins should therefore be seen not just as activators of B-cell proliferation but, perhaps more importantly, as mediators of enhanced B-cell survival.
The nursing role in limb salvage surgery.  Limb salvage surgery has proven itself as a valuable option for sarcoma patients.  The reconstruction options are vast and include metallic implants, allografts, and a combination of both.  The nursing implications for these patients are unlimited.  The patient needs to be educated and assessed closely for complications such as infections, nonunion of the allograft, and limited mobility.  Although the nursing care is more complicated, the rewards with working with these patients are great.
Why patients delay seeking care for cancer symptoms. What you can do about it.  Patient delay in seeking care for cancer symptoms is common and well documented by research studies.  Fear and denial, lack of information about cancer, and financial considerations all contribute to this delay.  Patient education may be an important factor in decreasing the length of delay and thereby improving treatment outcome.  By making good use of opportunities for patient education, primary care physicians may positively influence the prognosis of several types of cancer, particularly breast cancer and malignant melanoma of the skin.
Characteristics of erythroleukemia cells selected for vincristine resistance that have accelerated inducer-mediated differentiation.  The induction of murine erythroleukemia cells (MELC; DS19/Sc9) to terminal differentiation by hexamethylenebisacetamide (HMBA) is characterized by a latent period of 10-12 hr before onset of commitment to terminal-cell division and increased transcription of globin genes.  MELC variants, derived from this parental cell line, selected for resistance to vincristine (VC), can be induced to differentiate with little or no latent period.  This study shows that accelerated HMBA-induced commitment is characteristic of MELC with a low level (2- to 5-fold) of VC resistance in four independently derived cell lines.  Both resistance to VC and accelerated differentiation are stable phenotypes for at least 50 passages (approximately 5 months) in the absence of VC.  Low-level VC-resistant MELC do not display increased levels of P-glycoprotein or mdr1, mdr2, and mdr3 mRNAs, nor do they exhibit cross-resistance to colchicine or doxorubicin.  These cells do show (i) increased level of protein kinase C activity, (ii) reduced accumulation of [3H]VC, and (iii) restoration of VC sensitivity in the presence of verapamil.  MELC selected for higher levels of VC resistance (approximately 500-fold) do express high levels of P-glycoprotein and the mdr3 gene.  During HMBA-induced differentiation, DS19/Sc9 decrease [3H]VC accumulation, but P-glycoprotein content does not change.  A VC-transport-associated protein, also critical for the process of induced differentiation, may be constitutively present in VC-resistant MELC, accounting for their enhanced sensitivity to inducer.  This protein accumulates by exposure of VC-sensitive cells to HMBA, contributing to their differentiation and decreased level of VC accumulation.
Effects of site-directed mutagenesis at residues cysteine-31 and cysteine-184 on lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase activity.  Native lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT; phosphatidylcholine-sterol acyltransferase; phosphatidylcholine:sterol O-acyltransferase, EC 2.3.1.43) protein, and LCAT in which either or both of the enzyme free cysteines had been replaced with glycine residues by site-directed mutagenesis, has been expressed in cultured Chinese hamster ovary cells stably transfected with the human LCAT gene.  The mass of LCAT secreted, determined by immunoassay, did not differ in the native and mutant species.  LCAT specific activity was also unchanged in the mutant species.  In particular, the cysteine-free double mutant, in which Cys-31 and Cys-184 had both been replaced, was fully active in the synthesis of cholesteryl esters.  This result is not consistent with a catalytic role for LCAT free cysteine residues.  The classical inhibitor of LCAT activity, 5,5'-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB), which strongly (89%) inhibited the native enzyme, had partial (45%) inhibitory activity with mutant enzyme species containing a single -SH residue, while the double mutant was not significantly inhibited by DTNB.  These data are interpreted to suggest that Cys-31 and Cys-184 are vicinal both to each other and to the "interfacial binding site" at residues 177-182, and that DTNB exerts its effect by steric inhibition.
Transfection of C6 glioma cells with connexin 43 cDNA: analysis of expression, intercellular coupling, and cell proliferation.  C6 glioma cells express low levels of the gap junction protein connexin 43 and its mRNA and display very weak dye coupling.  When implanted into the rat cerebrum, these cells quickly give rise to a large glioma.  To investigate the role of gap junctions in the tumor characteristics of these cells, we have used Lipofectin-mediated transfection to introduce a full-length cDNA encoding connexin 43.  Several transfected clones were obtained that exhibited various amounts of connexin 43 mRNA transcribed from the inserted cDNA.  Immunocytochemical analysis revealed an increase in the amount of connexin 43 immunoreactivity in the transfected cells, being localized at areas of intercellular contact as well as in the cytoplasm.  The level of dye coupling was also assessed and found to correlate with the amount of connexin 43 mRNA.  When cell proliferation was followed over several days, cells expressing the transfected cDNA grew more slowly than non-transfected cells.  These transfected cells will be useful in examining the role of gap junctions in tumorigenesis.
Differentiation of HL-60 leukemia by type I regulatory subunit antisense oligodeoxynucleotide of cAMP-dependent protein kinase.  A marked decrease in the type I cAMP-dependent protein kinase regulatory subunit (RI alpha) and an increase in the type II protein kinase regulatory subunit (RII beta) correlate with growth inhibition and differentiation induced in a variety of types of human cancer cells, in vitro and in vivo, by site-selective cAMP analogs.  To directly determine whether RI alpha is a growth-inducing protein essential for neoplastic cell growth, human HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cells were exposed to 21-mer RI alpha antisense oligodeoxynucleotide, and the effects on cell replication and differentiation were examined.  The RI alpha antisense oligomer brought about growth inhibition and monocytic differentiation, bypassing the effects of an exogenous cAMP analog.  These effects of RI alpha antisense oligodeoxynucleotide correlated with a decrease in RI alpha receptor and an increase in RII beta receptor level.  The growth inhibition and differentiation were abolished, however, when these cells were exposed simultaneously to both RI alpha and RII beta antisense oligodeoxynucleotides.  The RII beta antisense oligodeoxynucleotide alone has been previously shown to specifically block the differentiation inducible by cAMP analogs.  These results provide direct evidence that RI alpha cAMP receptor plays a critical role in neoplastic cell growth and that cAMP receptor isoforms display specific roles in cAMP regulation of cell growth and differentiation.
Titrated intravenous barbiturates in the control of symptoms in patients with terminal cancer.  Patients with terminal cancer may have a series of severe and dehumanizing physical and psychologic symptoms.  To improve symptom control in the final days and hours of life, we administer intravenous barbiturates continuously to provide heavy sedation or continuous somnolence.  Titrated dosage is then reduced to a minimum, after a desired steady-state has been achieved.  Improved symptom control is provided, and the patient's dignity is maintained until death.
Management of soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities.  The management of soft tissue sarcomas has undergone and continues to undergo important changes.  The purpose of this report is to review the presentation, diagnosis, and natural history of soft tissue sarcomas.  In so doing, the importance of a careful and rigorous method of evaluation will be emphasized.  Furthermore, the results of multidisciplinary treatment, with a goal towards limb salvage, will be reviewed.  With appropriate and timely intervention, selected patients with pulmonary metastases may still experience long-term survival.  Throughout this review, the importance of early and continuing multidisciplinary treatment and evaluation will be emphasized.
Giant cell tumor of bone.  Giant cell tumor is the second most common benign tumor of bone.  Plain radiographs may demonstrate distinctive features but can also be misleading.  The diagnosis may be aided by the use of other imaging modalities, such as bone scan, computed tomography and angiography.  The recurrence rate is high, but some of the newer treatments seem to be associated with better outcomes.
Lack of effect of chronic administration of oral beta-carotene on serum cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations.  Previous studies suggest that chronic oral administration of retinol and other retinoids causes elevation of plasma triglyceride concentrations.  The effects of chronic oral administration of beta-carotene, a carotenoid partially metabolized to retinol, on plasma lipid concentrations have not been well studied; therefore, we studied 61 subjects over 12 mo while they were enrolled in a skin-cancer-prevention study in which patients were randomly assigned to receive either placebo (n = 30) or 50 mg beta-carotene/d orally (n = 31).  At study entry and 1 y later, fasting blood samples were obtained for measurement of triglycerides, total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, retinol, and beta-carotene.  Retinol concentrations changed minimally in both groups; beta-carotene concentration increased an average of 12.1 +/- 47 nmol/L in the placebo group and 4279 +/- 657 nmol/L in the active-treatment group.  Both groups experienced similar small increases in triglyceride and total cholesterol concentrations and small decreases in HDL cholesterol.  Daily oral administration of 50 mg beta-carotene/d did not affect plasma lipid concentrations.
Beta-carotene's effects on serum lipoproteins and immunologic indices in humans.  Doses of beta-carotene for cancer-prevention trials have been chosen based on epidemiologic data.  Mechanisms of the putative antineoplastic effects by beta-carotene are unknown but may involve modulation of the immune system.  We measured plasma carotenoid concentrations and selected immunologic indices at baseline and at 2 and 4 wk in 50 healthy humans (5 groups of 10 each) ingesting 0, 15, 45, 180, or 300 mg beta-carotene/d for 1 mo in this randomized placebo-controlled, open-label, parallel study.  Plasma beta-carotene concentrations were markedly increased by 2 wk and were correlated with dose.  Beta-carotene concentrations plateaued between 2 and 4 wk except for the 300-mg group.  Thus, we developed a dose-concentration curve to optimize beta-carotene-dose selection to achieve target plasma concentrations.  We were unable to identify any effects of beta-carotene ingestion on the immunologic indices studied, but modest increases in high-density-lipoprotein cholesterol were observed in all beta-carotene-treated groups.
Development of intrapancreatic transplantable model of pancreatic duct adenocarcinoma in Syrian golden hamsters.  Intrapancreatic and subcutaneous (SC) inoculation of cultured pancreatic cancer cells, derived from an induced primary pancreatic cancer in a Syrian hamster, resulted in tumor take in all recipient hamsters.  The intrapancreatic allografts grew rapidly, were invasive, and metastasized into the lymph nodes and liver in 2 of 9 cases.  In comparison, SC tumors grew relatively slower and formed a large encapsulated mass without invasion and metastases.  Histologically, tumors of both sites showed fairly well-differentiated adenocarcinomas of ductal/ductular type resembling the induced primary cancer.  Similar to the primary induced pancreatic cancers, tumor cells of both allografts expressed blood-group-related antigens, including A, B, H, Le(b), Le(y), Le(x), and tumor-associated antigen TAG-72.  The tumor cells did not express Le(a), CA 19-9, 17-1A, or DU-PAN-2.  The expression of these antigens was retained in the metastases and presented the same patterns of reactivity as the allografts.  Thus intrapancreatic transplantation provides a rapid model for production of pancreatic cancer with morphologic similarities to human pancreatic cancer.
Epithelial cells immortalized by human papillomaviruses have premalignant characteristics in organotypic culture.  Three HPV-16--and four HPV-18--immortalized human foreskin keratinocyte cell lines were analyzed on organotypic epidermal raft cultures at various passage levels.  This culture system allowed normal cultured keratinocytes to stratify and differentiate in a manner similar to normal epidermis.  All seven HPV-immortalized cell lines displayed epidermal morphologies on organotypic cultures, which were clearly abnormal and resembled premalignant lesions in vivo.  Features of premalignant lesions that were shared by all of the HPV-immortalized cell lines included disorganized tissue architecture, mitotic cells present throughout the living layers of the epidermal sheet, abnormal mitoses, enlarged nuclei, and variable cell size and shape.  Most HPV-immortalized cell lines were stable in terms of epidermal morphology with long-term passage in culture.  Two of the HPV-18--immortalized cell lines, however, lost all morphologically apparent terminal squamous differentiation potential after long-term passage in monolayer culture.  These results strongly support the idea that immortalization of squamous epithelial cells in culture by HPV-transforming genes generates a morphologically premalignant cell.
Expression of VLA-alpha 2, VLA-alpha 6, and VLA-beta 1 chains in normal mucosa and adenomas of the colon, and in colon carcinomas and their liver metastases.  'Very late antigen' (VLA) proteins are members of the integrin superfamily with cell-surface receptor function and are involved in the cell-cell matrix interaction.  They are heterodimers with a common beta 1 chain and different alpha chains counted through VLA-1 to VLA-6.  The VLA-2 complex (alpha 2/beta 1) was found to act as collagen receptor on platelets and the VLA-6 complex (alpha 6/beta 1) as laminin receptor.  Using monoclonal antibodies and an indirect immunoperoxidase method, we investigated the expression of VLA-alpha 2, VLA-alpha 6, and VLA-beta 1 chains in 20 normal colonic mucosa samples, in 20 colonic adenomas, and in 96 carcinomas together with 10 accompanying liver metastases.  All three proteins were expressed throughout the colonic epithelium, except for VLA-alpha 2, which was present in the cryptic gland but was absent on the mucosal surface in some cases.  In general, adenomas were strongly positive for the VLA proteins but 3 of 20 cases showed focal VLA-alpha 2-negative areas.  The carcinomas revealed considerable heterogeneity of VLA-alpha 2 expression; ie, 59 tumors were completely positive, 35 tumors revealed a focal loss of antigen, and 2 cases were negative.  This reduced antigen expression was statistically associated with Dukes' stage C/D (P = 0.003).  VLA-alpha 6 was expressed throughout in all tumors.  VLA-beta 1 was found extensively expressed in 77 carcinomas, partially expressed in 17 carcinomas, and was absent in 2 carcinomas.  As compared to their primary tumors, liver metastases showed roughly corresponding patterns of antigen expression.  The down regulation/loss of VLA proteins in a subset of epithelial colon tumors might cause a disturbed cell-cell/cell-matrix interaction that might augment the invasive property of their cells.
Basal cell-specific and hyperproliferation-related keratins in human breast cancer.  In normal breast tissue and in noninvasive breast carcinomas, various keratin-14 antibodies were reactive predominantly with the basal/myoepithelial cell layer, although mainly in terminal and larger ducts luminal cells sometimes also were stained.  A similar reaction pattern was found with an antibody directed against keratin 17, although this antibody was more often found negative than keratin 14 in the pre-existing myoepithelial cells in intraductal carcinomas.  Furthermore antibodies reactive with hyperproliferation-related keratins 6 and 16 were used.  One of these (LL025) was completely negative in normal breast tissue and noninvasive breast carcinomas.  However 10% of the invasive carcinomas were diffusely or focally positive with this latter antibody, while in 18 of 115 cases of invasive breast carcinomas studied, a basal cell phenotype was detected.  A relatively high concordance was found between the carcinomas immunostaining with the basal cell and the hyperproliferation-related keratins, but not between these markers and the proliferation marker Ki-67.  This supports the conclusion that basal cells in breast cancer may show extensive proliferation, and that absence of Ki-67 staining does not mean that (tumor) cells are not proliferating.
Botulinum toxin treatment in spasmodic torticollis.  Botulinum toxin A was administered to 19 patients in a double-blind placebo controlled trial.  Toxin was more effective than placebo for improving both head position and pain which was measured by an objective rating scale and videofilm assessments.  Following the controlled trial, treatment with botulinum toxin was continued in an open fashion.  A total of 60 patients with torticollis received toxin in a total of 117 treatment periods.  The mean follow up period was 8.4 months.  In 39 patients with pain there was benefit in 77% of treatment periods.  Some improvement in neck posture occurred in 83% of the treatment periods with a mean duration of 12 weeks.  Side effects were frequent with dysphagia being the most common (28% of treatment periods).  Botulinum toxin is an effective treatment for toticollis but treatment should be initiated with doses at the lower end of the range used in this study (400-600 mouse units).
Bimanual simultaneous motor performance and impaired ability to shift attention in Parkinson's disease.  The ability to share time and to shift attention between bimanual simultaneous motor tasks were studied in 18 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and 19 age- and intelligence-matched controls.  The task consisted of drawing triangles with the dominant hand and squeezing a rubber bulb with the nondominant hand.  Motor performance was measured using the variables: amplitude of squeezing, frequency of squeezing and velocity of drawing triangles.  After eliminating variance due to baseline differences in single-handed performance, the bimanual simultaneous performance of PD and controls turned out to be similar to the frequency of squeezing and the velocity of drawing triangles.  The amplitude of squeezing, however, differed between the two groups: it was significantly reduced in PD.  Arguably the disturbance in the bimanual performance of PD patients was not due to a disorder of time sharing, but to a decreased ability to shift attention from the visually cued task to the non visually cued task.  The results agree with current evidence that PD patients are more impaired when they have to rely upon internal control for the regulation of shifting attention than when external cues are available.
Misperceptions of comprehension difficulties of stroke patients by doctors, nurses and relatives.  Doctors, nurses and relatives involved with 30 recently aphasic stroke patients were asked to predict how the patient would perform on a comprehension test.  Results show that not only do doctors, nurses and relatives underestimate the receptive disability of these patients, but they also illustrate a lack of agreement between health professionals.  Implications for management are considered.
Practice effects on the preprogramming of discrete movements in Parkinson's disease.  The effects of practice on the simple and choice reaction times (RTs) of Parkinson's disease (PD) and control subjects in a discrete aiming task were analysed.  For controls, practice led to a selective decrease in choice RTs, as has been reported previously.  An opposite effect was seen in the PD group, with little change in choice RTs and substantial reduction in simple RTs.  The results suggest that PD subjects can use advance information to initiate discrete movements more rapidly, but that this ability to "preprogramme" movements requires practice.  Reconciliation of these results with studies reporting an inability to preprogramme in PD are made in a discussion of task characteristics which may allow or preclude preprogramming.
Surgical management of exophytic chiasmatic-hypothalamic tumors of childhood.  Sixteen children underwent 18 operations for radical resection of chiasmatic-hypothalamic tumors.  The clinical presentation correlated with age: infants under 1 year of age presented with macrocephaly, failure to thrive, and severe visual failure; children aged 1 to 5 years predominantly had precocious puberty with mild visual deficits; and older children (greater than 5 years old) had slowly progressive loss of vision.  All three infants had biologically aggressive tumors in spite of low-grade histology, and died from progressive tumor growth.  Eleven of the 13 children aged 1 year or over are alive and well, without clinical or radiographic evidence of disease progression, 4 months to 4 1/2 years following surgery.  Six of these patients, with a follow-up period of 10 months to 4 1/2 years (mean 27 months), have had no adjuvant therapy following radical surgical resection.  The authors conclude that: 1) radical surgical resection of chiasmatic-hypothalamic tumors can be performed with minimal morbidity; 2) radical resection may delay the time to disease progression in older children and postpone the need for irradiation; 3) resection of postirradiation recurrent tumors may provide neurological improvement and long-lasting clinical remission; and 4) chiasmatic-hypothalamic tumors of infancy are aggressive neoplasms that require multimodality therapy.
Long-term follow-up review of 31 children with severe closed head trauma.  Thirty-one children aged 3 to 15 years were followed for 5 to 11 years after suffering severe closed head trauma which caused coma for 1 week or more (median duration of coma 3 weeks).  One patient remained in a persistent vegetative state until his death 9 years later.  The other 30 recovered consciousness and were discharged.  All suffered diminution of their abilities, and 24 of them had major permanent disability.  The most common motor disabilities were pure spastic hemiparesis (seven cases), basal ganglia syndromes (four cases), ataxia (three cases), and a combination of hemiparesis and ataxia (five cases).  Of the 30 patients, 26 regained independent ambulation, seven were epileptic, and 14 were dysarthric in various degrees.  Only 10 had the cognitive ability to profit from the normal educational system, and none had attempted postsecondary education.  Social problems were common.  The worst outcomes were associated with intracranial bleeding and/or brain contusion seen on computerized tomography (CT) scans at the acute stage; the best were associated with normal CT scans.  The degree of residual disability in these children seems no less than that of adults with trauma of similar severity.
Neurobehavioral outcome 1 year after severe head injury. Experience of the Traumatic Coma Data Bank.  The outcome 1 year after they had sustained a severe head injury was investigated in patients who were admitted to the neurosurgery service at one of four centers participating in the Traumatic Coma Data Bank (TCDB).  Of 300 eligible survivors, the quality of recovery 1 year after injury was assessed by at least the Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS) in 263 patients (87%), whereas complete neuropsychological assessment was performed in 127 (42%) of the eligible survivors.  The capacity of the patients to undergo neuropsychological testing 1 year after injury was a criterion of recovery as reflected by a significant relationship to neurological indices of acute injury and the GOS score at the time of hospital discharge.  The neurobehavioral data at 1 year after injury were generally comparable across the four samples of patients and characterized by impairment of memory and slowed information processing.  In contrast, language and visuospatial ability recovered to within the normal range.  The lowest postresuscitation Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score and pupillary reactivity were predictive of the 1-year GOS score and neuropsychological performance.  The lowest GCS score was especially predictive of neuropsychological performance 1 year postinjury in patients who had at least one nonreactive pupil following resuscitation.  Notwithstanding limitations related to the scope of the TCDB and attrition in follow-up material, the results indicate a characteristic pattern of neurobehavioral recovery from severe head injury and encourage the use of neurobehavioral outcome measurements in clinical trials to evaluate interventions for head-injured patients.
Intracarotid hydroxyethyl methacrylate solution causing stroke in dogs.  Hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) has been advocated as a polymerizing solution with which to prevent deflation of detachable balloons in interventional neuroradiology.  It is pertinent to know if unpolymerized HEMA would have untoward effects if accidentally released into the carotid artery by balloon rupture or deflation.  Seven mongrel dogs underwent transfemoral catheterization of the common carotid artery and subsequent injection of HEMA solution in volumes of 1 cc in five dogs, 2 cc in one, and 4 cc in one.  Angiography performed at the time of injection revealed evidence of intravascular thrombosis as well as possible spasm.  Three surviving animals were sacrificed at 48 hours; the brains were fixed and examined histopathologically.  One brain was normal and one was autolyzed and could not be examined.  Five of the seven animals had histopathologically documented cerebral infarctions of varying size.  No foreign substance was seen within the blood vessels to suggest intravascular polymerization.  The animals injected with 2 or 4 cc HEMA solution did not survive 48 hours.  Literature review reveals little documentation of the toxicology of intravascular HEMA.  With its increasing popularity as a compound for polymerization in detachable balloons introduced into the brain, further investigations are warranted to understand the physical properties of the compound and potential risks of its use.
Hemiparkinsonism as a complication of an Ommaya reservoir. Case report.  The authors describe the case of a 28-year-old woman who developed the following symptoms in her right hand: a lasting resting tremor, transient focal rigidity, and paresthesia.  These deficits occurred following treatment with intrathecal methotrexate via an Ommaya reservoir which was placed too deeply, resulting in trauma to the contralateral mesencephalon.
Stereotactic investigation of limbic epilepsy using a multimodal image analysis system. Technical note.  A methodology has been developed for stereotactic investigation of limbic epilepsy using an image-analysis system that simultaneously displays different structural and functional images of the brain.  The validity and accuracy of this system were established with phantom studies.  Surgical planning and electrode implantation are guided by stereotactic magnetic resonance imaging, digital subtraction angiography, and position emission tomography.  This methodology provides the spatiotemporal relationship of cerebral structure and function necessary to identify seizure onset and propagation in human limbic system epilepsy.
An evaluation of sensory changes and pain relief in trigeminal neuralgia following intracranial microvascular decompression and/or trigeminal glycerol rhizotomy.  Nineteen patients with trigeminal neuralgia were treated with either trigeminal ganglion glycerolysis or glycerolysis and intracranial microvascular decompression.  All had a good degree of pain relief.  Of those receiving glycerol alone (group A), 50% subjectively reported a mild reduction of fine tactile sensation.  A similar response was reported by those treated with both glycerol and decompression (group B).  The degree of sensory loss was so mild that thermal testing was useless as a discriminatory tool.  The degree of sensory loss was not greater when both surgical procedures were performed than when the less-invasive trigeminal ganglion glycerolysis alone was used.
Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography: clinical applications in cerebrovascular disease.  Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography was introduced in 1982 as a noninvasive procedure for assessment of the intracranial cerebral circulation.  The lightweight and portable equipment used for transcranial Doppler examination facilitates its use in the bedside assessment of critically ill hospitalized patients and outpatients.  Clinical applications include the diagnosis of vasospasm in patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage, assessment of intracranial collateral flow in patients with extracranial arterial occlusive disease, detection of intracranial arterial stenosis, identification of the feeding arteries of arteriovenous malformations and monitoring the hemodynamic effects of their treatment, confirmation of the clinical diagnosis of brain death, intensive-care unit monitoring of brain-injured patients, and intraoperative and postoperative monitoring of neurosurgical patients.  Transcranial Doppler technology is also providing new insights into the pathophysiologic mechanisms of a variety of cerebrovascular conditions.  Clinicians will find transcranial Doppler technology most helpful if they have a specific question about the status of the intracranial circulation.  Further investigations may expand the clinical and research utility of this technology.
Arterial responses during migraine headache.  The superficial temporal artery has been thought to be the main focus of pain during migraine attacks, but its diameter has never been measured directly.  The use of a new, high-resolution ultrasound machine to measure arterial size in 25 migraine patients with unilateral head pain showed that the lumen was wider on the painful than on the non-painful side during a migraine attack.  The diameters of both radial arteries and the temporal artery on the non-painful side were smaller during than between attacks.  The generalised vasoconstriction was not shared by the temporal artery on the affected side, which suggests a local vasodilatory response.  The findings suggest that cephalic arteries may play a role in migraine pathogenesis.
Evoked potentials in assessment and follow-up of patients with Wilson's disease.  Treatment of 9 patients with Wilson's disease was prospectively studied with evoked potentials and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  Oral penicillamine therapy led to a decrease in auditory brainstem (ABP) and somatosensory (SEP) conduction times in 6 and 4 neurologically symptomatic patients, respectively.  ABP and SEP were normal in 3 other symptom-free patients.  MRI showed cerebral lesions in 4 of 7 patients.  Quantified indices of brain atrophy were unaffected by treatment.  ABP and SEP may reveal a reversible component of the disease that cannot be detected by MRI, and may be a more sensitive measure of treatment efficacy.
Effects of uvulopalatopharyngoplasty on sleep architecture and patterns of obstructed breathing.  In this retrospective study, 72 obstructive sleep apnea patients with polysomnograms taken before and after uvulopalatopharyngoplasty were evaluated.  Postoperatively, there was a significant improvement of sleep architecture and respiratory indices.  In addition, a second group of 17 patients also had position recordings with their polysomnograms.  Time spent in supine and lateral sleep positions changed postoperatively.  There was significant decrease of the apnea plus hypopnea index in the lateral position.  This study indicates that there is significant improvement of sleep architecture and respiratory indices in the majority of patients after uvulopalatopharyngoplasty, particularly in the lateral sleep position.
The molecular biology of occlusive stroke in childhood.  It is very likely that many of the same factors involved in occlusive disease in the adult are operative in the child.  The major difference may be in the factors that damage endothelium in these two age groups and thereby initiate this catastrophe (atherosclerosis versus "other" causes of endothelial changes).  Our task in this next decade is the rational exploration of the effects of endothelium-mediated kinins, endothelial secretory products, angiospasm, platelet aggregration, prostaglandins, and lipoproteins on pediatric stroke.
Infantile spasms.  Infantile spasms are a seizure disorder in young infants with diverse etiologies, suggesting that they arise from any disturbance of central nervous system function during susceptible periods of development.  The prognosis for normal intellectual and neurologic development parallels that of the underlying etiology.  Early and appropriate treatment with ACTH may lead to seizure control in a majority of patients.  The treating physician must anticipate the side effects of this modality.
Rett syndrome and the autistic disorders.  Rett syndrome is a disorder noted to date only in females and characterized by a pervasive developmental disability following apparently normal early infancy.  In addition to gait difficulties, stereotypic hand movements, and loss of communication and purposeful hand skills, autistic-like behavior is an early sign that often results in misdiagnosis.  Despite these significant clinical abnormalities, neuropathologic features are modest, and no consistent laboratory abnormality or diagnostic marker has been identified.  The current status of research in RS is considered within the context of autism and other disorders in which autistic features may occur, such as the fragile X syndrome.  The concept of autism as neurobiologically based behavior is developed.  As such, autism is regarded as an umbrella category containing an ever-expanding list of specific disorders.
Tourette syndrome: recent advances.  Clinical and genetic studies have allowed the limits of Tourette syndrome to be broadened.  There is now strong evidence that chronic motor tics and Tourette syndrome are different manifestations of an autosomal dominant gene with high penetrance.  A genetic link with obsessive-compulsive disorder also appears to have been established.  Up to 10% of cases of Tourette syndrome may be nongenetic phenocopies, however.  There is also an association between Tourette syndrome and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.  This complicates therapy, as psychostimulant drugs may precipitate or exacerbate tics in some individuals.  A high proportion of patients with Tourette syndrome also has neuropsychological deficits and learning disabilities.  The pathophysiology is incompletely understood.  The best supported hypothesis is that there is dopamine receptor supersensitivity, although there are strong suggestions of abnormalities in serotonin metabolism.  The possibility of abnormalities in neuropeptide systems is being explored.  Treatment of tics relies primarily on neuroleptics with dopamine receptor blocking activity.  Clonidine may be useful in some patients, especially those with behavior problems.  Obsessive-compulsive symptoms can be treated using appropriate pharmacologic agents.  The treatment of attention deficit disorder in patients with tics should begin with behavioral strategies.  Clonidine can be tried as the first-line drug, and psychostimulants should be used only if necessary and with great caution.  In rare instances it may be necessary to combine a psychostimulant and a neuroleptic.
The floppy infant: recent advances in the understanding of disorders affecting the neuromuscular junction.  The clinician is often asked to evaluate the floppy infant.  Numerous conditions that cause hypotonia in infancy are briefly outlined in this article.  These conditions may affect the brain, spinal cord, or motor unit.  Several disorders of neuromuscular transmission, including four distinct and recently described congenital myasthenic syndromes and infant botulism, are discussed thereafter.
Rehabilitation of the pediatric patient with a neuromuscular disease.  A rehabilitation program for a patient with a neuromuscular disease can be developed only after an accurate diagnosis has been established.  The diagnosis and its ramifications should suggest a natural course of disease which, it is hoped, can be improved upon with a rational and realistic program.  The program is best developed by an interdisciplinary team, including a pediatric neurologist, who should have the greatest understanding of the patient's problem and should ultimately be responsible for the implementation and monitoring of the program.  A child with cerebral palsy commonly requires the services of physical and occupational therapists as well as knowledgeable orthopedists.  Is the program appropriate? Does it consider the child's potential as well as his limitations? A child with a traumatic brain injury requires, in addition to the above, psychological intervention and an intensive educational program.  Will the child and family need help from mental health professionals? A child with a motor unit disease such as Duchenne's muscular dystrophy requires, in addition to the above services, a "philosophy" of care.  Will the child ever ambulate independently? If so, at what cost? What will be necessary for the child to reach this potential, including items such as orthoses and adaptive equipment? Will respirator care become necessary? What issues must be addressed for this form of care to be established? There is no one program for all children.  The programs must be individualized to meet the needs of the patient and the family.  This point cannot be overemphasized.
The use of ultrasound in evaluating neurologic diseases of childhood.  Real-time cranial sonography, intracranial Doppler, and neuromuscular sonography are the sonographic techniques that are applicable to the neurologic evaluation of infants and children.  Although limited by age, specificity, and operator skill and experience, the advantages of real-time cranial and intracranial Doppler sonography make them useful techniques in the evaluation of the young infant, particularly in the serial assessment of ventricular size and in the study of the critically ill infant.  The use of neuromuscular sonography in the assessment of the floppy infant and in the guidance of biopsy makes this an increasingly valuable tool.
Dwarf locus mutants lacking three pituitary cell types result from mutations in the POU-domain gene pit-1.  Mutations at the mouse dwarf locus (dw) interrupt the normal development of the anterior pituitary gland, resulting in the loss of expression of growth hormone, prolactin and thyroid-stimulating hormone, and hypoplasia of their respective cell types.  Disruptions in the gene encoding the POU-domain transcription factor, Pit-1, occur in both characterized alleles of the dwarf locus.  The data indicate that Pit-1 is necessary for the specification of the phenotype of three cell types in the anterior pituitary, and directly link a transcription factor to commitment and progression events in mammalian organogenesis.
Tonic contraversive ocular tilt reaction due to unilateral meso-diencephalic lesion.  We studied 4 patients with tonic contraversive ocular tilt reactions due to unilateral, paramedian, mesodiencephalic lesions.  This is in contrast to the only 2 previously reported patients with ocular tilt reactions due to unilateral mesodiencephalic lesions, each of whom had a paroxysmal ipsiversive ocular tilt reaction.  This new finding is considered in the context of previous clinical and experimental data on the various types of ocular tilt reactions that follow stimulation or destruction of the peripheral and central vestibular system.  Otolithic inputs to the interstitial nucleus of Cajal from the contralateral vestibular nucleus and motor outputs from the interstitial nucleus of Cajal to cervical and ocular motoneurons could be involved in the ocular tilt reaction.  We propose that in patients with unilateral meso-diencephalic lesions, a tonic contraversive ocular tilt reaction could be due to persistently decreased resting activity of ipsilateral interstitial nucleus neurons, whereas a paroxysmal ipsiversive ocular tilt reaction could be due to transiently increased activity of the same interstitial nucleus neurons.  Cases of ocular tilt reaction due to unilateral meso-diencephalic lesion point to the existence of a crossed graviceptive pathway between the vestibular nucleus and the contralateral interstitial nucleus of Cajal.
An estimate of the incidence of dementia in idiopathic Parkinson's disease.  The proportion of patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) who are considered demented ranges from 10% to 15%.  Because dementia may affect survival in PD, the incidence rate of dementia, rather than proportion, would be a more accurate measure of disease frequency.  We previously estimated the proportion of patients with PD and dementia to be 10.9% from the records of a cohort with the idiopathic form of PD in a major medical center.  We reviewed the clinical records of this cohort after 4 years and 9 months to estimate the incidence rate of dementia.  We identified 65 new cases of dementia from the 249 patient-records available.  Using the number of person-years of follow-up for each case as the denominator, we estimated the overall incidence rate to be 69 per 1,000 person-years of observation.  The mean age of this cohort was 71.4 years.  The cumulative incidence of dementia increased with age.  By 85 years of age, over 65% of the surviving members of the cohort were demented.  The age-specific incidence rates for dementia in this cohort of PD were significantly greater than for a similarly aged cohort of healthy elderly people.  The age-specific standard morbidity ratios indicated that, compared with people of similar ages, patients with PD have the highest increase in risk for dementia between ages 65 and 75.
Antemortem diagnosis of diffuse Lewy body disease.  Using the presence of widespread cortical Lewy bodies (LB) as the pathologic criteria of diffuse Lewy body disease (DLBD), we describe serial neurologic and mental status examinations in 6 patients with DLBD, 3 patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), and 1 patient with Parkinson's disease (PD).  The 6 patients with DLBD included 3 with neocortical neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) consistent with coincident AD.  Most patients with DLBD had gait impairment concurrent with mild to moderate dementia.  Abnormalities of tone or resting tremor were also prominent early symptoms in the subjects with DLBD, but not AD.  Patients with DLBD frequently had abnormal EEGs with background posterior slowing and a frontally dominant burst pattern at the time of mild to moderate dementia.  Agitation, hallucinations, and delusions were frequent early symptoms in DLBD patients.  Patients with DLBD without concomitant AD had numerous Alz-50 negative cortical plaques.  Patients with DLBD have a distinct clinical syndrome that can be differentiated from AD.  Pathologic features, including the absence of Alz-50 immunoreactivity, also differentiate DLBD from AD.
Abnormal pulsatile secretion of luteinizing hormone in men with epilepsy: relationship to laterality and nature of paroxysmal discharges.  We compared the pulsatile secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) between 13 men with clinically and electrographically documented temporal lobe seizures and 8 age-matched controls.  Serum for LH measurement was drawn every 15 minutes during 8 hours of EEG telemetry in both groups.  The 2 groups did not differ significantly in average mean baseline LH secretion, total LH secretion, or average pulse amplitude.  The group with seizures, however, showed a significantly greater (p less than 0.05) variability of baseline LH secretion and pulse frequency.  Among the men with unilateral paroxysmal EEG findings, pulse frequency was significantly greater (p = 0.05) with right epileptiform discharges or left slowing (6.4 +/- 0.4) than with left epileptiform discharges or right slowing (3.0 +/- 1.3).  The relationship of pulse frequency to the nature and laterality of paroxysmal discharges makes it unlikely that endocrine abnormalities can be attributed to medication alone and strengthens the notion that temporal lobe epileptiform discharges may disrupt hypothalamic regulation of pituitary secretion.
Neuroexcitatory plasma amino acids are elevated in migraine.  To investigate the role of glutamic (Glu) and aspartic acid (Asp) in migraine, we measured the plasma amino acids in migraine patients with and without aura, between and during attacks, and compared the profiles with the plasma amino acid profiles of tension headache patients and healthy controls.  Between attacks, migraineurs (notably with aura) had substantially higher plasma Glu and Asp levels than did controls and tension headache patients.  In addition, patients with migraine without aura showed low plasma histidine levels.  During migraine attacks, Glu (and to a lesser extent Asp) levels were even further increased.  The results suggest a defective cellular reuptake mechanism for Glu and Asp in migraineurs, and we hypothesize a similar defect at the neuronal/glial cell level, predisposing the brain of migraineurs to develop spreading depression.
Borderzone hemodynamics in cerebrovascular disease.  To investigate the possible existence of chronic selective hemodynamic impairment in the arterial borderzone regions of the brain, we used positron emission tomography (PET) to measure regional mean vascular transit time (rt, equal to the ratio of regional cerebral blood volume to cerebral blood flow) and regional oxygen extraction fraction (rOEF) in 32 patients with either severe internal carotid artery stenosis or occlusion and 11 normal controls.  Twenty-four of the patients had had TIAs or amaurosis fugax from 1 to 60 days before PET; all had normal brain CT.  We used a stereotactic localization method to locate the anterior and posterior borderzone regions of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory.  We then calculated ratios of each borderzone to the ipsilateral MCA territory for both rt and rOEF.  There was no significant difference from control ratios in any patient subgroup including those with greater than or equal to 75% stenosis or occlusion, those with or without contralateral greater than or equal to 50% stenosis, or those with abnormal hemodynamics in the MCA territory.  We therefore found no evidence for selective borderzone hemodynamic impairment in this group of patients with severe carotid artery disease.
Comparison of algorithms of testing for use in automated evaluation of sensation.  Estimates of vibratory detection threshold may be used to detect, characterize, and follow the course of sensory abnormality in neurologic disease.  The approach is especially useful in epidemiologic and controlled clinical trials.  We studied which algorithm of testing and finding threshold should be used in automatic systems by comparing among algorithms and stimulus conditions for the index finger of healthy subjects and for the great toe of patients with mild neuropathy.  Appearance thresholds obtained by linear ramps increasing at a rate less than 4.15 microns/sec provided accurate and repeatable thresholds compared with thresholds obtained by forced-choice testing.  These rates would be acceptable if only sensitive sites were studied, but they were too slow for use in automatic testing of insensitive parts.  Appearance thresholds obtained by fast linear rates (4.15 or 16.6 microns/sec) overestimated threshold, especially for sensitive parts.  Use of the mean of appearance and disappearance thresholds, with the stimulus increasing exponentially at rates of 0.5 or 1.0 just noticeable difference (JND) units per second, and interspersion of null stimuli, Bekesy with null stimuli, provided accurate, repeatable, and fast estimates of threshold for sensitive parts.  Despite the good performance of Bekesy testing, we prefer forced choice for evaluation of the sensation of patients with neuropathy.
Right-left disorientation in dementia of the Alzheimer type.  We demonstrated that right-left orientation (R/L-O) on a confronting subject is more impaired in patients with dementia of the Alzheimer type than in patients with multi-infarct dementia of comparable degree of dementia.  The impairment in R/L-O is independent of aphasia and spatial disorientation.
Dopamine beta-hydroxylase activity in cerebrospinal fluid of idiopathic torsion dystonia.  Since a postmortem biochemical study and a genetic linkage study of idiopathic torsion dystonia suggested possible involvement of dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH), we determined CSF DBH activities of Jewish and non-Jewish patients with childhood-onset idiopathic torsion dystonia and found no differences from a control population.
Inconsistent response to divalproex sodium in hemichorea/hemiballism.  We report 6 patients with hemichorea/hemiballism of vascular origin who were treated with divalproex sodium (Depakote).  Four of 6 responded initially.  Marked improvement was seen in 2 patients only and in 1 of these hemiballism recurred despite continuing therapy.  Divalproex sodium is not uniformly effective in the treatment of hemichorea/hemiballism.
Oxidation reactions in Parkinson's disease.  Free radicals generated from oxidation reactions may contribute to the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD).  Free radicals are capable of reacting almost instantaneously with membrane lipids and causing lipid peroxidation, membrane injury, and cell death.  Dopamine is metabolized by oxidation reactions capable of generating free radicals.  Recent evidence indicates that the substantia nigra of patients with PD contains increased iron, which enhances oxidation, and decreased glutathione, which protects against the formation of free radicals.  Further, the end products of lipid peroxidation are increased in the substantia nigra of patients with PD, supporting the notions that free radicals are being generated and may contribute to dopamine neuronal death.  This hypothesis suggests that antioxidant therapies may slow the rate of progression of PD and raises concern that metabolites of levodopa therapy may accelerate the rate of neuronal degeneration.
Levels of mRNA for a putative kainate receptor are affected by seizures.  In situ hybridization and RNA blot-hybridization techniques were used (i) to examine the regional distribution of mRNA for a putative kainate receptor in adult rat brain and ii) to test the possibility that seizures affect expression of the receptor gene.  The highest densities of hybridization were distributed within hippocampal pyramidal and granule cells, medial habenula, Purkinje cells and the molecular layer of cerebellum, and olfactory bulb.  Recurrent limbic seizures caused a massive, delayed, and reversible reduction in levels of the kainate receptor mRNA in dentate gyrus; lesser decreases were found in pyramidal cell fields of hippocampus and superficial cortex.  These findings provide evidence that unusual patterns of physiological activity can alter genomic expression for a subclass of glutamate receptors in brain.
Immunodominant regions for T helper-cell sensitization on the human nicotinic receptor alpha subunit in myasthenia gravis.  In myasthenia gravis an autoimmune response against the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (AChR) occurs.  The alpha subunit of the AChR contains both the epitope(s) that dominates the antibody response (main immunogenic region) and epitopes involved in T helper cell sensitization.  In this study, overlapping synthetic peptides corresponding to the complete AChR alpha-subunit sequence were used to propagate polyclonal AChR-specific T helper cell lines from four myasthenic patients of different HLA types.  Response of the T helper lines to the individual peptides was studied.  Four immunodominant sequence segments were identified--i.e., residues 48-67, 101-120, 304-322, and 419-437.  These regions did not include residues known to form the main immunogenic region or the cholinergic binding site, and they frequently contained sequence motifs that have been proposed to be related to T-epitope formation.
Conditioning of the spinal stretch reflex: implications for rehabilitation.  The purpose of this article is to describe a new technique that can potentially be applied to patients with hyperactive spinal stretch reflexes (SSRs).  The progression of clinical research from conditioning of individual muscles or muscle groups (electromyographic biofeedback) to conditioning SSRs is explained.  Research data from subhuman primates in addition to the first human experiments are reviewed.  Potential applications of SSR conditioning are discussed, as are the issues requiring further delineation and research before the specificity of a training effect can be ascertained.
Wilson's disease: 35 years' experience.  Thirty-seven Chinese patients fulfilling the criteria for Wilson's disease seen during a 35-year period were reviewed.  Males and females were equally affected.  Twenty-two patients were symptomatic and 15 asymptomatic; most of them presented before the third decade.  Thirty-one per cent of the relatives screened showed evidence of disease, and parents were rarely affected (13 per cent).  Half of the adult symptomatic females presented with primary amenorrhoea.  Liver laboratory tests were abnormal in only 50 per cent of patients, with gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase being the most sensitive index.  Renal disease was infrequent.  Serum caeruloplasmin level was the single biochemical parameter of prognostic significance (p = 0.0001).  Seventy per cent of the symptomatic patients showed an improvement after treatment with penicillamine.
Bicarbonate-buffered lidocaine-epinephrine-hyaluronidase for eyelid anesthesia.  A double-masked, randomized clinical trial was conducted to determine if subcutaneous eyelid injections of a bicarbonate-buffered lidocaine-epinephrine-hyaluronidase mixture were less painful than unbuffered injections.  Twenty-one patients received both buffered (pH = 7.4) and unbuffered (pH = 4.6) injections.  After each injection, patients recorded pain on a scale of 0, "no pain," to 10, "severe pain." Mean pain score for buffered injections was 2.0 versus 4.1 for unbuffered injections (P = 0.0003).  Seventeen (81%) of 21 patients ranked the buffered injection less painful.  Use of a bicarbonate-buffered lidocaine-epinephrine-hyaluronidase mixture is effective in making ophthalmic anesthesia less painful.
Optic nerve sheath meningoceles. Clinical and radiographic features in 13 cases with a review of the literature   Thirteen patients with dilated intraorbital optic nerve sheaths with an expanded, patulous cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) space were studied with high-resolution computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  Eleven patients had bilateral findings.  Headache or visual complaints, or both, were present in all patients.  Signs of optic nerve dysfunction were present in eight patients.  Three patients had visual acuity worse than 20/200.  Cerebrospinal fluid pressure was mildly elevated in two patients.  Three patients underwent a surgical procedure; visual acuity improved in one.  The authors propose the term meningocele for this condition and suggest MRI with fat-suppression techniques and off-axis sagittal views as the radiographic procedure of choice.
Strategies underlying the control of disordered movement.  The purpose of this article is fourfold.  First, a theory of motor control--the dual-strategy hypothesis--is outlined.  Second, the methodologies and theoretical framework that are used to develop this theory are examined.  Third, motor dysfunction is discussed in the context of this theory.  In particular, Down syndrome, Parkinson's disease, cardiovascular accidents, and spasticity are discussed.  Finally, potential applications of the theory to physical therapy are considered.
A new challenge--robotics in the rehabilitation of the neurologically motor impaired.  Rehabilitation robotics is a research area, originating in engineering, that has emerged in the last decade.  Its broad aim is to use robot technology to assist people with movement dysfunction.  The neurologically impaired population might gain considerably from the provision of robots as "assistants" or "therapy aides," but the interface with the machine must match both the physical and intellectual abilities of the user.  We therefore consider a multidisciplinary approach, encompassing both behavioral and engineering perspectives, to be essential in achieving this aim.  However, to date, published reports have been largely restricted to engineering journals or conference reports, and relatively little has appeared in the therapy literature.  This article seeks to introduce physical therapists to robotics, describe possible applications to the rehabilitation of neurologically impaired patients, and suggest issues deserving further investigation.
Brain potentials associated with movement in traumatic brain injury.  Brain potentials may be used to assess the functional abnormalities that underlie impairments of movement.  The purpose of this article is to illustrate the usefulness of examining these potentials.  In addition to an overview of the topic, the article includes a report of a study demonstrating that there were differences between the brain potentials of five patients with traumatic brain injury and those of four healthy control subjects.  All five patients were in the postacute phase of hemiplegia.  Slow cortical potentials associated with simple goal-directed forearm and finger movements were recorded from frontal and parietal electrodes.  Two seconds of movement-related electroencephalographic activity (movement-related potential) were recorded.  The patients showed reduced brain potentials for movements associated with their paretic limb and, to a lesser extent, reduced brain potentials for movements associated with their nonparetic limb.  The waveforms obtained from the patients were unusual, with uncharacteristic cross-cortical movement-related potential correlations associated with specific electrode configurations, as well as with specific movement conditions.  Brain potentials associated with the fore-period interval of a simple reaction time paradigm were later recorded in two of the patients with traumatic brain injury and in a control subject to help determine the functional significance of the relative positivity apparent in their movement-related potential data.  This preliminary study indicates that electroencephalographic potentials obtained during the preparation for and execution of movement can provide information regarding the basis for motor dysfunction.
Movement disorders--limb movement and the basal ganglia.  The primary concern of this article is to review experimental methods that may lead to a better understanding of the functional role of the basal ganglia in the control of movement.  Two models of basal ganglia impairment are considered: Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease.  The review focuses primarily on akinesia and bradykinesia because they are key abnormalities of basal ganglia dysfunction.  In general, through electromyography and kinematic analysis of movement, it may be possible to characterize specific movement disorders.  Specifically, if damage sustained by the central nervous system is traced to a certain structure, it may provide insight on the extent of involvement and functional role of that structure in the control of movement.  Much of the data reviewed suggests that the basal ganglia may play a specific role in the initiation and regulation of force control.
Return to work for persons with traumatic brain injury: a supported employment approach.  Supported employment was used to place 41 persons into competitive employment during 30 months.  All individuals had experienced severe head injuries; almost 70% of injuries were due to motor vehicle accidents.  A mean of seven years had passed since injury for all referred clients, who had been unconscious a mean of 53 days.  Only 36% of referred clients had achieved any competitive postinjury employment, compared with 91% of the same group who were competitively employed before injury.  A job retention rate of 71% was reported, with most jobs in warehouse, clerical, and service-related occupations.  A mean of 291 hours of job coaching was required to place and maintain all clients in supported employment.
Functional evaluation of quadriplegic patients using a hand neuroprosthesis.  The objective of this retrospective study was to compare the abilities of quadriplegic patients to complete activities of daily living with and without the use of a portable hand neuroprosthesis.  The neuroprosthesis provided synthetic hand grasp through functional neuromuscular stimulation of paralyzed forearm and hand muscles.  Data were obtained from telephone interviews, patient records, and videotapes.  Twenty-two quadriplegic patients were included in the study; 15 were functional at a C5 spinal cord injury level and seven at a C6 level.  The median success rate (ie, the percentage of patients who could complete each activity) across the ten activities was 89% with the hand neuroprosthesis but was only 49% without the hand neuroprosthesis.  All patients could perform more tasks when the neuroprosthesis was used, although the relative improvement of C5 patients was larger than that of C6 patients.
Impaired awareness of behavioral limitations after traumatic brain injury.  Sixty-four traumatically brain injured patients were divided into three groups.  Patients in Group I overestimated their behavioral competencies.  Patients in Group II showed behavioral ratings similar to relatives' reports concerning behavioral competencies.  Patients in Group III underestimated their behavioral competencies.  Group I patients had greater evidence of bilateral and multiple-site lesions than group II and III patients.  Speed of left-hand finger tapping was also worse in Group I than groups II and III, but other standard neuropsychologic test findings failed to separate the groups.  Specific brain lesion sites were not related to group membership.  Impaired awareness of behavioral limitations after traumatic brain injury may be related to neuropsychologic changes not measured by standard tests.  Bilateral impairment of heteromodal cortex may be important to this phenomenon when it exists several months or years postinjury.
Maximal exercise testing of mentally retarded adolescents and adults: reliability study.  Few data are available regarding maximal exercise testing of mentally retarded individuals.  No data are available on the reliability of maximal exercise testing of mentally retarded individuals.  The purpose of this study was to determine the reliability of graded exercise testing of mentally retarded adolescents and adults.  The testing was conducted at two geographically different centers.  At Center A, 14 mentally retarded adolescents (11 boys, three girls) with Down syndrome, who were educable or trainable, were recruited from a nonresidential school.  The subjects completed two Balke-Ware treadmill protocols until exhaustion.  The treadmill time and heart rate (HR) were recorded.  The time between tests was approximately one week.  At Center B, 21 mentally retarded adults (14 women, seven men means IQ = 56) were recruited from local workshops and group homes.  These subjects completed a treadmill walking protocol, with metabolic measurements, until exhaustion.  The time between tests varied from one to four months.  At Center A, the subjects achieved a mean treadmill time of 8.72min on test one and 8.84min on test two (means HR = 174 and 175bpm, respectively).  The reliability coefficient between the two tests was .94.  At Center B, the subjects achieved a mean V0(2)max of 27.2mL.kg-1.min-1 on test one and 26.9mL.kg-1.min-1 on test two.  The reliability coefficient was .93.  These data show that maximal exercise testing is reliable for these populations of mentally retarded individuals, exhibiting similar values to their nonretarded peers.
Familial trigeminal anesthesia.  Familial congenital trigeminal anesthesia as an isolated abnormality is an unusual disorder.  To our knowledge, only one family has previously been reported.  We report here a family with three affected members demonstrating facial anesthesia, bilateral corneal changes, and nasal septal damage secondary to self-traumatization.  Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated hypoplasia of gasserian ganglia and trigeminal nerves in the affected father of two affected sons.  The pathogenesis of this disorder appears to be congenital hypoplasia of the trigeminal nerves and gasserian ganglia that is inherited in a dominant fashion.
Enhanced in vitro uptake and retention of 3H-tetraphenylphosphonium by nervous system tumor cells.  Photodynamic therapy is a promising treatment for human brain tumors because of the selective retention of certain compounds by tumor cells.  Certain lipophilic cationic compounds, such as tetraphenylphosphonium (TPP), are selectively taken up by a variety of carcinomas.  Although preferential retention of TPP has been demonstrated for the breast carcinoma cell line MCF-7, this compound had not been tested previously on cells derived from nervous system tumors.  In the present study, tritiated-TPP (3H-TPP) uptake and retention for eight different cell cultures of three histologically different types of nervous system tumors was measured and the data were compared to a positive control (MCF-7) and negative controls (normal African Green monkey kidney epithelium (CV-1) and the normal human fibroblast (WI-38) cell lines).  Uptake and retention characteristics could be grouped by specific pathological tumor types, but individual tumor variability was notable.  Malignant astrocytoma (grade III/III glioblastoma) and malignant neurofibrosarcoma cells showed preferential uptake and retention of 3H-TPP relative to meningioma cells and normal controls.  A clonogenic assay utilizing the cytotoxic lipophilic cationic compound dequalinium showed strong retainers of 3H-TPP to be more susceptible to the effects of dequalinium than weak retainers.  These data demonstrate that certain human and experimental animal nervous system tumor cell lines retain lipophilic compounds possessing a delocalized positive charge.  Lipophilic cationic compounds may be useful in the intraoperative delineation of tumor margins and in the photodynamic therapy of certain nervous system tumors.
Tension pneumocephalus: treatment with controlled decompression via a closed water-seal drainage system. Case report.  The successful treatment of a patient with tension pneumocephalus by controlled decompression via external drainage is described.  The advantage of the technique includes the immediate release of high pressure and the capability of maintaining constant low pressure to enable and facilitate sealing of dural tears.  The method has been used in three other patients, leading to resolution of the tension pneumocephalus without recurrence or other complications.
Cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea following acoustic neurinoma surgery. Technical note.  The authors describe a method of preventing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea following surgery for acoustic neurinoma.  Mastoid air cells exposed during craniectomy are skeletonized and packed with bone dust, then covered with Surgicel soaked with Tisseel fibrin glue.  The use of this technique has reduced the number of acoustic neurinoma cases requiring secondary mastoidectomy for CSF leakage from 16% to 5%.
The effect of glucose administration on carbohydrate metabolism after head injury.  The role of intravenous infusion of glucose in limiting ketogenesis and the effect of glucose on cerebral metabolism following severe head injury were studied in 21 comatose patients.  The patients were randomly assigned to alimentation with or without glucose.  Systemic protein wasting, arterial concentrations of energy substrates, and cerebral metabolism of these energy substrates were monitored for 5 days postinjury.  Both groups were in negative nitrogen balance, and had wasting of systemic proteins despite substantial protein intake.  Blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) glucose concentrations were highest on Day 1, but remained higher than normal fasting levels on all days of study, even in the patients who received no exogenous glucose.  Although there were no differences in blood or CSF glucose concentrations in the two groups of patients, the glucose group had higher plasma insulin levels, with a mean +/- standard deviation of 14.8 +/- 7.3 microU/ml compared to 10.3 +/- 4.2 microU/ml in the saline group.  The blood concentrations of beta-hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate, pyruvate, glycerol, and the free fatty acids were higher in the saline group than in the glucose group.  Cerebral oxygen consumption was similar in the two groups, while the cerebral metabolism of glucose and of the ketone bodies was dependent on whether glucose was administered.  In the glucose group, glucose was the only energy substrate utilized by the brain.  In the saline group, the ketone bodies beta-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate replaced glucose to the extent of 16% of the brain's total energy production.  Cerebral lactate production and CSF lactate concentration were lower in the saline group.  These studies suggest that administration of glucose during the early recovery period of severe head injury is a major cause of suppressed ketogenesis, and may increase production of lactic acid by the traumatized brain by limiting the availability of nonglycolytic energy substrates.
Management of meralgia paresthetica   Meralgia paresthetica is a syndrome of pain or dysesthesia, or both, in the anterolateral thigh caused by entrapment or neurinoma formation of the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve.  Conservative treatment was successful in relieving symptoms in 91% of 277 patients with this syndrome; however, 24 patients required surgical treatment for intractable symptoms.  Although neurolysis with transposition is the most common procedure, sectioning of the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve was performed in 24 cases and was successful in 23.  One patient had early symptomatic relief, but subsequently developed different neurological signs and symptoms because of an undetected pelvic neoplasm.  Anatomical variations of the nerve and neurinomas, which occur frequently, are easily handled with sectioning but may lead to recurrence with neurolysis and transposition.
Post-traumatic intracerebral pneumatocele: case report.  Pneumocephalus occurs in 0.5 to 1.0% of head trauma, but may also occur after neurologic surgery, or as a result of eroding infection or neoplasm.  The pathophysiology involves the presence of craniodural fistula allowing ingress of air.  A ball-valve mechanism may allow air to enter but not exit the cranium, or CSF leak permits air entrance as fluid leaves the intracranial space.  While a "succession splash" is considered diagnostic of pneumocephalus, most patients have nonspecific signs and symptoms such as headache.  Therefore, a high index of suspicion in a patient with recent head trauma is necessary.  The diagnosis is made radiographically by CT scan.  This is generally performed to rule out intracranial hematoma or cerebral contusion in head trauma, but will reveal even very small quantities of air to the unsuspecting physician.  Therapy is often noninvasive, allowing the craniodural defect to heal spontaneously.  Selected situations require immediate operative repair of the fistula.
Headache. Public health problem.  Headache is, and apparently always has been, a frequent pain syndrome.  It is reported in American and Western European societies in very high percentages of the population.  Headache, and specifically severe headache, have also been reported as prevalent from a variety of societies worldwide, although prevalence rates have varied (they are very low, for example, in the People's Republic of China).  Whether prevalence varies with different socioeconomic groups remains uncertain.  Severe headache and specifically migraine is, for reasons still unknown, much more common in women, and, in most studies, is reported to decrease in prevalence in older age groups.  Positive family histories are common, but the precise role of genetics is unknown.  A major problem in the epidemiologic studies remains the difficulty of uniform definition of headache syndromes.
The classification and diagnosis of headache disorders.  Headache disorders recently have been reclassified, and new operational diagnostic criteria assist in making the correct diagnosis.  These diagnostic criteria have been accepted worldwide.
Basic mechanisms in vascular headache.  To better understand and treat painful conditions, one needs to identify the cause, discover the source, and develop knowledge of peripheral and central pain transmission; headaches are no exception.  The development of appropriate animal models is important.  Accordingly, we have reviewed the anatomy, neurochemistry, electrophysiology, and pharmacology of the trigeminovascular system in experimental animals and emphasized whenever possible the relevance of this final common pathway to migraine, cluster, and other headache syndromes in humans.  For example, based on recent anatomic dissections, the pericarotid cavernous sinus plexus was suggested as an important focus to investigate cluster headache pathophysiology.  This plexus is an anatomic point of convergence for the nerves giving rise to the signs of sympathetic and parasympathetic activity and sensory symptoms that develop in cluster patients.  As in other nociceptive systems, trigeminovascular axons assume at least two important roles.  One concerns the transmission of nociceptive information.  Electrophysiologic evidence supports the trigeminal nucleus caudalis as an important site for the convergence of visceral (vessel) and somatic (forehead) inputs to mediate the referral of vascular pain to superficial tissues.  A second important role concerns the initiation of local increases in blood flow and enhanced protein permeability (sterile inflammation) via the axonal release of vasoactive neuropeptides.  Plasma extravasation develops within the dura mater following trigeminal stimulation.  Extravasation can be blocked by the administration of ergot alkaloids or sumatriptan, a new serotonin-like agonist, and a prejunctional (neuronal) mechanism of action for these drugs (such as blockade of release) was suggested based on experimental evidence.  Whether vasoconstriction also relates to the therapeutic efficacy remains to be determined.  As in other organ systems, real or threatened tissue injury provides an important stimulus for depolarizing sensory fibers.  The stimulus may come from external conditions such as reduced blood flow or hypoglycemia.  The brain may also possess intrinsic neuronal mechanisms by which nociceptors may be synthesized (e.g., glutamate-induced neurotoxicity, seizures).  Molecules of relevance include bradykinin, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and potassium.  Experimental evidence was presented demonstrating that the trigeminal nerve mediates hyperemia within cortical gray matter by axon-reflex like mechanisms.  An important role for this nerve was established during the hyperemic period of recirculation after ischemia or during severe hypertension above the limits of autoregulation.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
The concept of migraine as a state of central neuronal hyperexcitability.  This article explores the hypothesis that migraine with aura is associated with a state of central neuronal hyperexcitability.  The authors propose that this central neuronal hyperexcitability involves overactivity of the excitatory amino acids, glutamate, and possibly aspartate.  Stimuli that activate the migraine attack evoke neuronal depolarization, slow depolarization shifts, and spreading suppression of spontaneous neuronal activity possible by glutamate and K+ dependent mechanisms.  A low brain Mg2+ and consequent reduced gating of glutamatergic receptors may provide the link between the physiologic threshold for a migraine attack and the mechanisms of the attack itself by promoting glutamate hyperactivity, neuronal hyperexcitability, and susceptibility to glutamate-dependent spreading depression.
Developments in 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor pharmacology in migraine.  Because a satisfactory animal model for migraine does not exist, attempts to determine a common mechanism of action for effective antimigraine agents may be of benefit in elucidating the pathogenesis of this neurologic syndrome.  The present review demonstrates that the clinical data that has developed over the past 30 years may allow for the elucidation of the role of specific 5-HT receptor subtypes in the pathophysiology of migraine.  A large number of both acute and prophylactic antimigraine agents share an ability to interact with 5-HT receptor subtypes in human brain.  As summarized in Table 3, acute antimigraine drugs (e.g., ergots, sumatriptan) share high affinity for 5-HTID receptors and somewhat lower affinity for 5-HT1A receptors.  These receptors are present in certain intracranial blood vessels.  5-HT1D receptors are also located on nerve terminals where they act to inhibit the release of 5-HT and other neurotransmitters.  Theoretically, 5-HTID receptor agonists may acutely inhibit the release of vasoactive or pain-inducing substances in the perivascular space.  Conceivably, drugs acting at this receptor would stop the progression of this perivascular process.  In addition, a number of prophylactic antimigraine drugs display a relatively high affinity for both 5-HT2 and 5-HT1C receptors in human brain.  Although these receptors are also found in certain blood vessels, they are present throughout the nervous system.  The receptors appear to mediate neuronal depolarizations at the cellular level.  Moreover, the 5-HT2 receptor appears to play a key role in the development of inflammation in certain smooth muscle systems.  Theoretically, the ability of 5-HT2 antagonists to protect perivascular inflammation may account for their efficacy in the prophylactic treatment of migraine.  These data offer a novel approach to the analysis of antimigraine agents.  Drugs could be selected for use in clinical migraine studies based on their selectivity for a specific 5-HT receptor subtype.  For example, an agent that displays both high affinity and selectivity for 5-HT1D receptors could be clinically evaluated.  Its effectiveness, or lack thereof, would indicate the importance of this specific 5-HT receptor site in the pathogenesis of migraine.  Future attempts to determine a common mechanism of action for effective antimigraine agents should facilitate the elucidation of the pathogenesis of this neurologic syndrome.
Manifestations of migraine.  Migraine is a disorder with multiple manifestations affecting the circulation, gastrointestinal tract, and the central nervous system.  Involvement of the autonomic nervous system is responsible for many of the clinical features.  An attack of migraine can vary from a fragment of the clinical spectrum to one with several phases and potentially permanent sequelae.
Modern pharmacotherapy of migraine.  Rectal ergotamine and naproxen are the major candidates for the ad hoc treatment of migraine attacks; for particularly dramatic episodes, intravenous DHE with prochlorperazine is the author's preference.  For long-term stabilization, after simpler measures fail, valproate appears to be a major addition to migraine therapy.
Advances in cluster headache.  The physician may have to combine the art and science of medicine in the management of this most fascinating of human ailments.  The choice of drugs and the length of treatment prescribed are greatly influenced by the individual physician's experience, convictions, and reasoning.  Needless to say, chronic use of narcotics should be avoided.  The author's own regimen is to use combinations of ergotamine prophylaxis with either verapamil or prednisone in episodic cluster headache and with lithium for chronic cluster headache.  Management of the treatment-resistant patient remains problematic, but a carefully performed trigeminal radiofrequency thermocoagulation procedure may be worthwhile.
Drug-induced headache.  Headache induced by medications used for nonheadache conditions, and more importantly, headache perpetuated by symptomatic medications used for primary headache disorders are discussed in detail in this article.  The clinical features and mechanisms of drug-induced headaches are reviewed.  Ergotamine and analgesic rebound phenomena are described.  Management strategies for drug-induced headaches are outlined.
Oromandibular disorders and headache. A critical appraisal.  Oromandibular disorders are functional disorders and associated pains in the anatomic region of the temporomandibular joint.  Their diagnosis and treatment are controversial because of the lack of conformity concerning these disorders among health care providers.  This article provides a clear classification of these disorders and critically reviews their evaluation and treatment.
Psychologic and behavioral aspects of chronic headache.  It is important for physicians to be aware of the expectations and psychologic needs patients have, to understand how psychologic and personality variables can impact care, to realize the importance of patient education, and to be cognizant of how environmental factors can influence headache pain behaviors.  Empirical data indicate that the nonpharmacologic treatments of biofeedback, relaxation, and stress coping training can serve as useful adjunctive or alternative procedures, and that the combined use of medication and nonpharmacologic treatments yields the greatest clinical outcome.  Certain headache types show minimal response to nondrug therapies alone (cluster, menstrual, and post-traumatic headache).  Age and personality variables have a bearing on nondrug treatment outcome as well.
Surgical decompression without transposition for ulnar neuropathy: factors determining outcome.  Fifty-one surgical decompressions without nerve transposition for ulnar neuropathy were performed in 46 patients.  All of the patients were men with an average age of 59 years at the time of surgery.  The follow-up range was between 5 and 32 months (average, 17.8 months).  The disease involved the nondominant arm in 24 patients (52%) and was bilateral in 5 (11%).  In 23 cases (50%), no predisposing condition could be identified, whereas 15 patients (33%) abused alcohol and 8 patients (17%) had diabetes mellitus.  Fifty-seven percent of the patients helped by surgery had symptoms for less than 1 year, whereas only 30% of patients with symptoms for more than 1 year had symptomatic improvement.  The relative magnitude of the slowing of ulnar nerve conduction velocity across the elbow was not significantly correlated with the success of decompression in relieving symptoms.  Ulnar nerve conduction velocities across the elbow were 36.13 +/- 11.76 m/s in those responding to surgery and 38.97 +/- 13.91 m/s in those not responding (c = 0.06, dF = 50, P less than 0.3).  A total of 37 patients showed symptomatic improvement after decompression.  Simple decompression of the ulnar nerve was performed under local anesthesia without transposition of the nerve.  In all of these cases, compression of the nerve occurred predominantly in the epicondylar groove.  Narrowing of the nerve in the groove was present in 28 cases (55%); scar tissue was found adhering to the nerve in 21 cases (41%); and two pseudoneuromas were found (4%).  Forty-one operations (80%) resulted in symptomatic improvement, typically noted by the patient within the first month postoperatively.
Blood flow direction in the lumbar nerve root.  The effect of clipping on lumbar nerve root blood flow rates in the region of the nerve root canal was studied experimentally in the hog.  Blood flow rate was measured using the hydrogen washout technique.  When the entrance zone was clipped with a microvascular clip, blood flow rate of the nerve root was decreased by 37% in comparison with the initial control rate; clipping at the exit zone reduced blood flow rate by 69%.  Blood flow direction in the lumbar nerve root within the nerve root canal was found to be predominantly proximal.  The current data indicate that the more lateral the impingement of the nerve root occurs, the more ischemic changes are induced.
Preventing stroke by the modification of risk factors.  Epidemiologic research has revealed the major risk factors in cerebrovascular disease.  This review will concentrate on three important risk factors: elevated blood pressure, the most common and important, since it is responsible for up to 70% of all strokes; raised cholesterol; and smoking.  These factors are important not only because they increase the risk of stroke, but also because they are amenable to modification by drugs, diet, or other interventions.  Strategies to avoid stroke can either 1) try to produce substantial reductions, usually with drugs, in the level of the risk factor in the few individuals in the population with high levels (the "high-risk" approach), or 2) try to produce modest reductions in the level of the risk factor in every individual in the population, usually not with drugs but with lifestyle modification (the "mass" approach).  The prevention of stroke could best be achieved through continuing medical efforts to deal with high-risk individuals and through political strategies to encourage a healthier lifestyle in the population as a whole.
Cytosolic free calcium during focal cerebral ischemia and the effects of nimodipine on calcium and histologic damage.  The role of calcium as a mediator in neuronal death during ischemia is now quite strong.  Evidence supporting this link includes studies in cell cultures and measurements of calcium accumulation in the mitochondria during ischemia, as well as direct measurements of shifts in extracellular calcium using microelectrodes.  Since it is dangerously high concentrations of the intracellular free calcium that have been hypothesized to lead to neuronal damage, direct in vivo measurements of this parameter in ischemia are important.  A technique for the measurement of intracellular free calcium is described, along with data from studies that dramatically demonstrate the time course of changes in intracellular free calcium induced by focal ischemia.  Additional data are also presented that indicate that cellular damage can be attenuated by the use of agents that block calcium channels (nimodipine, which blocks voltage-sensitive calcium channels, and MK-801, which blocks receptor-operated channels) and support the concept that these agents owe their beneficial effects to their ability to reduce the accumulation of intracellular calcium.
Effect of nimodipine on acute ischemic stroke. Pooled results from five randomized trials.  In a review of pooled data from five double-blind, placebo-controlled studies of nimodipine in acute ischemic stroke, we compared the effect of 120 mg nimodipine given orally with that of placebo.  In the five studies, 871 patients were followed, and 781 adhered to entry and inclusion criteria.  End points were mortality and outcome at the end of the treatment period (21 or 28 days).  Outcome was assessed with Mathew's scale and the physician's clinical judgement.  The treatment and control groups were well matched with respect to demographic data, risk factors, and baseline Mathew scores.  In the treatment group, 34 patients (7.9%) died during the treatment period, whereas 54 (12.3%) in the control group died, corresponding with a mortality reduction of 36%.  Significantly less neurologic impairment at the end of the treatment period was documented under nimodipine treatment, and this impairment improved more in patients with moderate-to-severe stroke (baseline Mathew score less than 66) if administration of nimodipine occurred within 12 hours after stroke onset or if the patient was more than 65 years old.  The overall incidence of adverse reactions was relatively modest, and these were of minor severity; only a few appeared to have more than a remote relation to the study medication.
Sleep disturbances in survivors of the Nazi Holocaust.  OBJECTIVE AND METHOD: Sleep disturbances are commonly reported by victims of extraordinary stress and can persist for decades.  This study was designed to test the hypothesis that survivors of the Nazi Holocaust would have significantly more and different sleep problems than depressed and healthy comparison subjects and that the severity of the survivors' problems would be correlated with length of time spent in a concentration camp.  Forty-two survivors, 37 depressed patients, and 54 healthy subjects of about the same age, all living in the community, described their sleep patterns over the preceding month on the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, a self-rating instrument that inquires about quality, latency, duration, efficiency, and disturbances of sleep, use of sleep medication, and daytime dysfunction.  RESULTS: The survivors had significantly greater sleep impairment than the healthy comparison subjects, as measured by all subscales of the index, but had less impairment than the depressed patients except on the sleep disturbances and daytime dysfunction subscales.  However, for specific items within these subscales, survivors had significantly more frequent awakenings due to bad dreams and had less loss of enthusiasm than the depressed subjects.  Sleep disturbances and frequency of nightmares were significantly and positively correlated with the duration of the survivors' internment in concentration camps.  CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that for some Holocaust survivors, impaired sleep and frequent nightmares are considerable problems even 45 years after liberation.
Large-scale neurocognitive networks and distributed processing for attention, language, and memory.  Cognition and comportment are subserved by interconnected neural networks that allow high-level computational architectures including parallel distributed processing.  Cognitive problems are not resolved by a sequential and hierarchical progression toward predetermined goals but instead by a simultaneous and interactive consideration of multiple possibilities and constraints until a satisfactory fit is achieved.  The resultant texture of mental activity is characterized by almost infinite richness and flexibility.  According to this model, complex behavior is mapped at the level of multifocal neural systems rather than specific anatomical sites, giving rise to brain-behavior relationships that are both localized and distributed.  Each network contains anatomically addressed channels for transferring information content and chemically addressed pathways for modulating behavioral tone.  This approach provides a blueprint for reexploring the neurological foundations of attention, language, memory, and frontal lobe function.
Impairment of sequences of memory-guided saccades after supplementary motor area lesions.  Different paradigms of saccades were recorded electro-oculographically in 2 patients with infarction affecting the left supplementary motor area.  Saccades made toward visual targets (visually-guided saccades) or away from them (antisaccades) were normal in both patients.  Memory-guided saccades, made to the remembered position of a flash occurring 2 seconds before, were preserved in 1 patient and only slightly impaired in the other.  However, sequences of two or three memory-guided saccades were severely impaired in both patients.  It has previously been reported that the supplementary motor area plays an important role in programming sequential limb movements.  Our data suggest that this area plays a similar role in the control of sequential eye movements.
Brain pH in head injury: an image-guided 31P magnetic resonance spectroscopy study.  It has been suggested that brain acidosis may follow head trauma, and therapies aimed at correcting acidosis have been proposed.  Direct measurements of intracellular pH, however, have thus far not been possible in clinical situations.  We have studied the intracellular brain pH in 22 patients after head injury (mean Glasgow Coma Score 6.1).  Patients were investigated by a combined approach of phosphorus 31 magnetic resonance spectroscopy and magnetic resonance imaging (overall examination time 50-75 min) at a mean time of 11 days after injury (36 hours to 24 days).  31P spectra were obtained in 11 patients on assisted ventilation and in 11 patients on spontaneous ventilation.  These spectra were analyzed to yield the pH in the regions studied in all the patients.  All pH values were in the normal or alkalotic range when compared with 6 age-matched normal controls.  No differences were found between patients on assisted ventilation and patients on spontaneous ventilation.  When analyzed as a group, the brain pH in the focal lesions appeared to increase in the first days, to reach a peak in the alkalotic range in the second week, and to return toward normal within 3 weeks from acute injury.  Our results suggest that there is no evidence of posttraumatic intracellular brain acidosis in recent human head injury, and therefore, therapies aimed at alkalinizing brain cells need to be reconsidered.
Magnetic motor-evoked potentials in epilepsy: effects of the disease and of anticonvulsant medication.  Magnetic motor-evoked potentials were recorded in 53 patients with medically intractable, mainly temporal lobe epilepsy and compared with potentials of 110 healthy volunteers.  The motor-evoked potentials were reevaluated in 16 of the 53 patients after substantial reduction of antiepileptic drug doses.  The objective was to assess the effect of epilepsy and of anticonvulsant medication on the central motor system.  In subjects receiving antiepileptic treatment, cortical threshold intensities were markedly elevated and peripheral latencies were prolonged.  Cortical threshold intensities and peripheral latencies decreased to approach control values after anticonvulsant medication was reduced but were increased in patients treated with 2 or 3 anticonvulsant agents instead of 1.  Additionally, high levels of interictal epileptiform activity and a high frequency of seizures significantly decreased the central motor conduction time and, in part, threshold intensities.  The central motor conduction time was further diminished after reduction of anticonvulsant treatment and increased when several drugs were administered.  The duration of epilepsy, the location of the epileptic focus, and the type of the epileptic seizure did not affect motor-evoked potentials.  Conclusively, central motor pathways are endogenously facilitated by epileptiform activity even if clinical signs of their involvement are absent.  Anticonvulsant medication exerts major reversible effects on magnetic motor-evoked potentials.
A follow-up study of intractable seizures in childhood.  One hundred forty-five children with seizures that were refractory to medical therapy for at least 2 years were followed 5 to 20 years after onset.  The majority of children with uncontrollable seizures (61%) were mentally retarded, and most of these (73%) had onset of seizures at younger than 2 years of age.  Age of onset was significantly later (mean 5.0 +/- 0.5 yr [SEM]) in the group of children with borderline to normal intelligence.  Follow-up data showed remission of seizures in a significant proportion of children with borderline or normal intelligence, with a linear decrease of the percentage with persistent seizures at a rate of about 4% per year.  Remission of seizures was much less frequent (1.5%/yr) in the group with mental retardation.  Seizure type had some effects on outcome.  Children with focal atrophic brain lesions did no worse than those without definable pathology on brain-imaging studies.
Relationship of clinical features with psychological status in primary fibromyalgia.  Clinical features and psychological status determined by the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) in 103 patients with primary fibromyalgia syndrome (PFS) were analyzed by univariate and multivariate techniques to determine if clinical features were related to psychological status or were intrinsic to PFS per se.  The central features of PFS, e.g., number of pain sites, number of tender points, fatigue, and poor sleep, were independent of psychological status.  However, discriminant analysis identified 4 variables--patient-reported depression, anxiety, stress, and pain severity--which together predicted 3 MMPI subgroups with an accuracy of 55% (P less than 0.001); the only musculoskeletal feature--pain severity--alone provided an accuracy of only 34% (P greater than 0.05).  These data suggest a new concept, that the central features of fibromyalgia are independent of the psychological status and are more likely related to the PFS itself.  However, pain severity may be influenced by psychological factors.
Brain death and organ donation in a neurosurgical unit: audit of recent practice   OBJECTIVE--To assess the potential for increasing the yield of donors by comparing the current pattern of brain death and organ donation in a neurosurgical unit with that reported in 1981 and with a recent national audit.  DESIGN--Retrospective review of all deaths for 1986, 1987, and 1988 and prospective data for 1989.  SETTING--A regional neurosurgical unit serving 2.7 million population.  RESULTS--Of 553 deaths, 35% (191) patients died while on a ventilator and 17% (92) after discontinuation of ventilation.  Medical contraindications to donation were found in 23% (32) of 141 patients tested for brain death, in 38% (19) of 50 patients who died while being ventilated who were not tested, and in 12% (11) of 92 patients no longer being ventilated.  Consent for donation was sought in 88% (96) of 109 medically suitable brain dead patients and granted in 70% (67) of these.  Half those with permission for multiorgan donation had only the kidneys removed.  CONCLUSIONS--More organs may be lost owing to transplant team logistics than by failure to seek consent from relatives of brain dead patients.  The estimated size of the pool of potential donors depends on what types of patients might be considered.  Ensuring that all who die while being ventilated are tested for brain death and considering the potential for donation before withdrawing ventilation could yield more donors.  Ventilating more patients who are hopelessly brain damaged to secure more donors raises ethical and economic issues.
Treatment of fulminant hepatic failure with insulin and glucagon. A randomized, controlled trial.  Insulin and glucagon are among the therapeutic modalities that have been investigated in the treatment of fulminant hepatic failure (FHF).  We have completed a randomized, controlled trial of insulin and glucagon in 38 patients with FHF from either viral or toxin exposure.  The control and treatment groups consisted of 21 and 17 patients, respectively, and did not differ significantly in etiology or admission laboratory values.  Mortality was not significantly different between control and treatment groups and was 67% and 82%, respectively.  Time from randomization to death or discharge was not significantly different between the two groups.  Peak levels of alpha-fetoprotein were statistically higher in survivors than in nonsurvivors (P less than 0.01).  We conclude that even though a type-2 error may exist, the combination of insulin and glucagon is not useful in the treatment of FHF.
Analgesic use: a study of treatments used by patients for migraine prior to attending the City of London Migraine Clinic.  Eighty-three unselected patients attending the City of London Migraine Clinic for the first time were asked about their drug intake and use of alternative treatment.  Thirty-one of those questioned took regular daily doses of medication.  Fifteen were taking a combination of drugs bought 'over the counter' (OTC) and drugs prescribed by their GP; eleven took OTC drugs only; and 5 took prescription drugs only.  It was noticeable that those taking drugs prescribed both by the GP and obtainable over the counter were more likely than the other groups to be taking several drugs rather than a single type.  Thirty five of the 83 (42.2%) had tried alternative treatments for their attacks.
Vasospasm contributes to monosodium glutamate-induced headache.  Consumption of monosodium glutamate has long been considered to precipitate headaches in susceptible patients.  In this study the direct effects of glutamate and its metabolite, glutamine, on arterial contractility were examined using rings of rabbit aorta.  In a high concentration glutamate caused significant concentration-dependent contractions (EC50, 10(-1)M; maximum tension, 188.4 +/- 33.3 mg wt tension/mg tissue).  Agonists and antagonists for alpha-adrenergic, histaminergic, serotonergic, cholinergic, and GABA-nergic receptors as well as inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis failed to influence glutamate contractions.  At high concentrations (10(-5)M) the calcium channel blocker, verapamil, inhibited the glutamate response.  Glutamate and glutamine both exhibited concentration dependent relaxation of norepinephrine (NE), phenylephrine (PE), histamine, serotonin (5-HT), and prostaglandin F2 alpha (PGF2 alpha)-induced contractions.  Kainic acid (10(-4)M), an agonist of one subpopulation of central glutamate receptor, potentiated glutamate-induced vasoconstriction; a higher concentration (10(-3)M) produced an irreversible inhibition of glutamate contractility.  Only the central glutamate receptor antagonist, ketamine (10(-4)-10(-2)M), induced a reversible, concentration dependent inhibition of glutamate-induced contractions.  Glutamate contractility was not dependent on extracellular calcium, an intact endothelium or neuronal function.  These results demonstrate a direct effect of glutamate on peripheral arterial tone.  Dietary consumption of large quantities of MSG may represent a serious health hazard to certain individuals with pre-existing vascular disease.
The blink reflex in cluster headache.  To investigate the involvement of the trigeminal system in cluster headache, in twelve subjects the electrically-elicited blink reflex during a symptomatic period was examined.  In eleven cases, the amplitude of the contralateral R2 response on the symptomatic side was significantly lower, at the same stimulus intensity, than on the asymptomatic side (p = 0.005).  The blink reflex can be useful to evaluate biological and drug-induced phenomena in cluster headache.
Assessment and treatment of children's headaches from a developmental perspective.  Childhood headache is a common pediatric problem.  Clinical researchers have evaluated several behavioral treatment, such as biofeedback and relaxation training, that may be viable interventions.  Adding a developmental perspective to the evaluation and treatment of childhood headache is a likely way to increase the effectiveness of these strategies.  This paper presents developmental issues related to the assessment and treatment of childhood headache.  Three major areas of development are examined and the impact of these areas on the treatment and assessment of headache are discussed.  The three major areas are cognitive development, self-regulation and psychosocial development.  Provided are practical suggestions for the application of child development principles to assessment and intervention practices that may be more developmentally appropriate.
Health status in patients with tension headache treated with acupuncture or physiotherapy.  Sixty-two female patients with chronic tension headache were randomly divided into two treatment groups--acupuncture and physiotherapy.  Their overall function (Sickness Impact Profile), and mental well-being (Mood Adjective Check List) and the intensity and frequency of headache were assessed before and after treatment.  Before treatment the patients showed significantly more dysfunction and less positive mental well-being than a general population sample.  Both treatment groups improved in overall function, the physiotherapy group somewhat more.  The mental well-being increased only in the physiotherapy group.  The intensity and frequency of headache was significantly reduced in both the physiotherapy group and the acupuncture group.  The intensity of headache was significantly more improved in the physiotherapy group.  The improvement of headache intensity persisted unchanged 7-12 months after treatment.
Nocturnal sleep recording with cassette EEG in chronic headaches.  Many headache patients complain of poor sleep, and sleep disturbance has been shown to play a role in chronic pain.  We recorded nocturnal sleep with a 4-channel cassette EEG monitoring device in 10 common migraine patients, 10 individuals with muscle contraction (tension) headache, and 10 chronic tension-vascular headache sufferers.  Migraine patients had essentially normal sleep, although rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and REM latency were increased.  Patients with tension headache had reduced sleep time and sleep efficiency, decreased sleep latency but frequent awakenings, increased nocturnal movements, and marked reduction in slow wave sleep, without change in REM sleep or latency.  Mixed-element headaches with both tension and vascular features were associated with reduced sleep, increased awakening, diminished slow wave sleep, and REM sleep that was decreased in amount and reduced in latency.  The findings suggest that patients with intermittent migraine may have minimal sleep disturbance, while chronic headache may be worsened by chronically poor sleep.  Muscle contraction headache may be associated with frequent awakenings and decreased slow wave sleep similar to the sleep changes of fibrositis, while chronic tension-vascular headache may have a depressive substrate.  Four-channel sleep recording may miss contributory sleep apnea, but nonetheless cassette EEG may facilitate outpatient evaluation of refractory headaches.
Contingent Negative Variation in migraine.  The Contingent Negative Variation (CNV) is an event-related slow potential.  It was recorded in healthy volunteers (n = 8) and in patients suffering from migraine without (n = 12) or with (n = 5) aura, during one (CNV1) and three second (CNV3) foreperiods in a forewarned reaction time task.  CNV1 was recorded at the vertex while CNV3 was recorded at multiple electrode sites to assess topographical differences.  Seven out of twelve migraine patients without aura had increased CNV1 amplitudes.  CNV3 amplitudes were increased as well, but only at electrode positions C3 and C4 and not at Fz.  CNV3, which allows for analysis of both an early and a late CNV component, could improve the discrimination of migraine without aura beyond that of CNV1.  In migraine with aura all CNV parameters were at control levels, confirming previous results.  The data obtained are discussed in terms of arousal, activation and stress and the "biobehavioral model of migraine" (Welch, 1986).
Centrifugal intensity and duration as countermeasures to soleus muscle atrophy.  Mechanical acceleration is a countermeasure that may be employed to prevent atrophy of slow-twitch muscle during non-weight bearing.  In the present study, daily centrifugation of rats for different durations (1 or 2 h) and at different gravitational intensities (1.5 or 2.6 G) was used to test whether mechanical acceleration could ameliorate the atrophy of the soleus muscle induced by non-weight bearing (tail-traction model).  The soleus muscle atrophied 32% during 7 days of non-weight bearing without countermeasures.  Centrifugation treatment did not completely prevent atrophy relative to precontrol wet weight of the soleus muscle.  Non-weight-bearing groups receiving 2-h daily treatments of 1, 1.5, or 2.6 G had 48, 56, and 65%, respectively, of the atrophy observed in the non-weight-bearing-only group compared with the precontrol group.  No evidence was obtained that centrifugation at 2.6 G was more effective than exposure to 1 or 1.5 G as a countermeasure to non-weight-bearing-induced atrophy of the soleus muscle.
Effects of carotid denervation and decerebration on ventilatory response to CO.  To clarify the mechanisms involved in the ventilatory response to the inhalation of low concentrations of CO (0.18-0.22% in air), the roles of the arterial chemoreceptors and the forebrain structures have been investigated in unanesthetized adult cats.  The ventilatory response was observed in conscious animals intact, after carotid denervation (CD), and after midcollicular decerebration.  The results show that the initial small ventilatory depression was unaffected by CD but that the subsequent characteristic tachypnea was blunted after CD even after more prolonged exposure to CO.  The CO tachypnea was not observed after decerebration, but a residual hyperventilation was noted with the higher concentration used.  It may be concluded that carotid chemoreceptors do not mediate the CO tachypnea, which may then originate in suprapontine structures as shown by comparison of intact and decerebrate animals.  The blunting of the tachypnea after CD may be caused by the relative hypercapnia observed in CD animals.  The residual hyperventilation observed in decerebrate animals may be caused by central acidosis and/or some peripheral potentiation of chemoreceptor activity resulting from the decrease in arterial blood pressure that accompanied CO inhalation in decerebrate animals.
Florid refractory schizophrenias that turn out to be treatable variants of HLA-associated narcolepsy.  Narcolepsy in which the hallucinatory component is unusually prominent may lead to the development of an illness indistinguishable from the schizophrenic syndrome.  Psychotic symptoms dominate the symptomatology, so that the primary illness is obscured.  Five patients are described for whom conventional antipsychotic drugs were ineffectual, but for whom treatment with stimulants produced substantial improvement.  The diagnosis of narcolepsy was confirmed by Human Leukocyte Antigen typing and sleep laboratory testing.  These results support the "REM intrusion" hypothesis of the causation of schizophrenia in as many as 7% of a series of schizophrenic patients.  Implications for diagnosis and treatment are discussed.
Neurotoxic action of veratridine in rat brain neuronal cultures: mechanism of neuroprotection by Ca++ antagonists nonselective for slow Ca++ channels.  The effect of various Ca++ antagonists and local anesthetics on neuronal cell degeneration induced by veratridine was studied in primary rat brain neuronal cultures.  Cell death was quantified by measuring lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) released in the culture medium.  The neuronal cell degeneration was Ca+(+)-dependent because, in the absence of extracellular Ca++, 16 hr of exposure to 30 microM veratridine failed to produce release of LDH.  Ca++ antagonists, nonselective for slow Ca++ channels (flunarizine, cinnarizine, lidoflazine, prenylamine and bepridil) inhibited veratridine-induced release of LDH with IC50 values between 0.11 and 0.47 microM.  Ca++ antagonists selective for slow Ca++ channels were less potent and inhibited veratridine-induced release of LDH at concentrations in the following order of potency: nicardipine greater than gallopamil and verapamil greater than niludipine greater than nitrendipine greater than nifedipine greater than nimodipine greater than diltiazem.  Tested local anesthetics were incomplete inhibitors of veratridine-induced release of LDH.  A good correlation was found between the potency of the drugs to inhibit released LDH induced by 30 microM veratridine in neuronal cultures and their binding affinity for the batrachotoxin binding site of Na+ channels in rat cortex synaptosomal preparation.  It is concluded that protection against veratridine-induced neurotoxicity can be mediated by blocking a veratridine-sensitive Na+ channel.  It is a property of certain nonselective Ca++ antagonists.  There is apparently no direct relationship with Ca++ antagonistic activity.  The effect is unrelated to local anesthetic activity.
Central adenosinergic system involvement in ethanol-induced motor incoordination in mice.  To clarify if the behavioral interaction between ethanol and adenosine reported previously occur centrally or due to a peripheral hemodynamic change, the effect of i.c.v.  adenosine agonists, N6-(R-phenylisopropyl)adenosine (R-PIA), N6-(S-phenylisopropyl)adenosine, 5'-(N-cyclopropyl)-carboxamidoadenosine, antagonists, theophylline and 8-p-(sulfophenyl)theophylline as well as enprofylline on ethanol-(i.p.)-induced motor incoordination was evaluated by rotorod.  Adenosine agonists and antagonists dose dependently accentuated and attenuated, respectively, ethanol-induced motor incoordination, thereby suggesting a central mechanism of adenosine modulation of this effect of ethanol and confirmed our previous reports in which adenosine agonists and antagonists were given i.p.  Enprofylline, a weak adenosine antagonist but potent inhibitor of cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase, did not alter ethanol's motor incoordination, further supporting involvement of brain adenosine receptor mechanism(s) in ethanol-adenosine interactions.  Results from R-PIA and N6-(S-phenylisopropyl)adenosine experiments showed nearly a 40-fold greater potency of R-vs.  S-diastereoisomer, suggesting predominance of adenosine A1 subtype.  However, 5'-(N-cyclopropyl)-carboxamidoadenosine data indicate complexity of the mechanism(s) and point toward an additional involvement of a yet unknown subtype of adenosine A2.  No effect of ethanol on blood or brain levels of [3H]R-PIA was noted and sufficient amount of the latter entered the brain to suggest adenosine receptor activation adequate to produce behavioral interaction with ethanol.  There was no escape of i.c.v.-administered [3H]R-PIA from brain to the peripheral circulation ruling out a peripheral and supporting a central mechanism of ethanol-adenosine interaction.
Interactions between N-methyl-D-aspartate and CGS 19755 administered intramuscularly and intracerebroventricularly in pigeons.  Behavioral effects of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and the competitive NMDA antagonist cis-4-phosphonomethyl-2-piperidine-carboxylic acid (CGS 19755) were studied in pigeons.  NMDA decreased responding under a fixed-ratio schedule of food presentation and was 8000 times more potent administered intracerebroventricularly (i.c.v.) as compared to intramuscularly (i.m.).  CGS 19755 was 870 times more potent in producing catalepsy when administered i.c.v.; however, the duration of catalepsy was similar by the two routes of administration.  Administered i.m.  CGS 19755 decreased response rates only at doses that also produced catalepsy; administered i.c.v.  some doses of CGS 19755 decreased responding without producing other behavioral effects.  Rate-decreasing effects of i.m.  NMDA were attenuated by i.m.  CGS 19755; however, when CGS 19755 was administered i.c.v., there was little or no antagonism of NMDA.  Rate-decreasing effects of i.c.v.  NMDA were not attenuated by i.m.  or i.c.v.  CGS 19755 up to doses that produced catalepsy or eliminated responding.  The large difference in potency between i.m.  and i.c.v.  administration for NMDA and for CGS 19755, as well as the slower onset of catalepsy when CGS 19755 was administered i.m., suggests these compounds do not readily cross the blood-brain barrier when administered parenterally.  The inability of CGS 19755 to attenuate the rate-decreasing effects of NMDA when CGS 19755 or NMDA was administered i.c.v.  suggests NMDA might decrease responding by different mechanisms when administered i.m.  or i.c.v.  in pigeons.  Together these results indicate antagonism of NMDA in this study, and perhaps in other studies, when both NMDA and CGS 19755 were administered parenterally, might result from a peripherally mediated interaction.  Moreover, this agonist-antagonist interaction is not a simple, competitive antagonism.
Mechanical restraint use among residents of skilled nursing facilities. Prevalence, patterns, and predictors   The patterns of and risk factors for mechanical restraint use were determined in 12 skilled nursing facilities.  Restraints were being used for 59% of residents at the beginning of the study; 31% of remaining residents were restrained during the follow-up year.  No facility characteristic was associated with restraint use.  The resident characteristics independently associated with initiation of restraints were older age, disorientation, dependence in dressing, greater participation in social activities, and nonuse of antidepressants.  Unsteadiness (72%), disruptive behavior such as agitation (41%), and wandering (20%) were the most frequently cited reasons for initiation of restraints.
Response to treatment with antihistamines in a family with myotonia congenita.  In a family in which myotonia congenita was found in five generations, both great-grandparents of the index case were affected.  In subsequent generations mild and severely affected cases were clearly segregated down parallel lines of this family.  The grandmother of the index case had noted improvement with an antihistamine.  When the index case was prescribed trimeprazine, she showed a striking reduction in severity of symptoms.  Antihistamines seem to deserve further evaluation as a safe and effective treatment for myotonia congenita.
Transcranial Doppler in acute hemispheric brain infarction.  We studied cerebrovascular anatomy using intra-arterial digital angiography, and blood flow velocity in the middle cerebral artery (MCA) using transcranial Doppler (TCD) ultrasonography in 42 patients with acute hemispheric ischemic brain infarction.  We compared angiography with TCD and the clinical findings within 6 hours of the onset of symptoms.  The location and extent of the chronic ischemic brain damage was assessed by CT performed 1 to 3 months after the ictus.  Abnormal TCD, as manifested by either an unobtainable MCA flow signal or a significantly depressed MCA flow velocity, was highly associated with proximal MCA occlusions demonstrated by angiography.  Abnormal TCD predicted both larger chronic CT lesions and more extensive ischemic change within the MCA territory.  These data demonstrate that early TCD conveys useful information concerning cerebral tissue prognosis following hemispheric ischemia.
"Pseudospasticity" in Guillain-Barre syndrome.  We report a woman with Guillain-Barre syndrome who developed a flexion posture of the right arm and hand resembling upper motor neuron dysfunction.  EMG demonstrated that involuntary peripherally generated continuous motor unit discharges caused the posture.
Suppression of carbamazepine-induced rash with prednisone.  We report our experience with 20 patients who developed a rash shortly after the introduction of carbamazepine and were treated with prednisone and an antihistamine.  Sixteen patients were successfully continued on carbamazepine while 4 had to discontinue the drug.
Handcuff neuropathies   Compressive neuropathy due to tight application of handcuffs occurred in 5 patients.  The superficial radial nerve was affected in 8 hands and the median nerve in two.  Neurologic deficits persisted as long as 3 years after handcuffing.  Nerve conduction studies helped to exclude malingering and other diagnoses.  All patients had been intoxicated when handcuffed or had been arrested with force.  The handcuff mechanism, which allows accidental overtightening after application, is an unrecognized factor in these neuropathies.
Mesencephalic cholinergic nuclei in progressive supranuclear palsy.  Using an antibody against choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), mesencephalic cholinergic cell nuclei were studied in autopsy material from 3 cases of progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and 4 controls.  ChAT-immunoreactive neurons were quantified in sections that spanned the rostrocaudal extent of each nucleus.  In PSP, there was a significant decrease in the number of neurons with detectable immunoreactivity for ChAT in and adjacent to the central gray substance in the following nuclei: the nucleus of Edinger-Westphal (69%); the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus (97%); the interstitial nucleus of Cajal (78%).  A cell loss was also evident in a group of neurons found in the deep layers of the superior colliculus (93%).  In contrast, the estimated number of ChAT-immunoreactive cell bodies in cranial nerves III and IV, in the mesencephalic reticular formation, and in the parabigeminal nucleus was not different from that of controls.  The results are compatible with the notion that, in PSP, there is a regionally selective destruction of cholinergic neurons.
Central nervous system involvement in Von Hippel-Lindau disease.  Fifty individuals with Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) were studied with gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to determine the frequency and distribution of CNS lesions.  The associated clinical features were also reviewed.  Thirty-six (72%) of the 50 had 1 or more CNS tumors.  The most frequently affected sites in the CNS excluding the retina were the cerebellum (52%), spinal cord (44%), and brainstem (18%).  New regional predilections for the craniocervical junction and conus medullaris were demonstrated by this study.  Forty-one percent of all VHL patients with CNS tumors were neurologically asymptomatic: cerebellar tumors (50%), spinal cord tumors (50%), and brainstem tumors (44%) were often without clinical signs or symptoms.  Multiple lesions were common.  The mean age of all VHL patients (34.5 years) was similar to the mean age of all CNS VHL patients (34.4 years), suggesting a lack of age association.  CNS lesions commonly occurred in the 2nd decade of life.  All patients at risk for VHL should be evaluated using gadolinium-enhanced MRI after 10 years of age, although ophthalmic examination should be initiated within the 1st 2 years of life.  Enhanced MRI is particularly useful in the detection of CNS tumors in patients with the VHL gene.
Prognosticating study for cervical myelopathy using evoked spinal cord potentials.  One hundred twenty-three cases of cervical spondylotic and ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL) myelopathy cases with long tract signs subjected to surgical treatment were studied to identify the most important factors having an influence on postoperative outcome using evoked spinal cord potentials (ESCP).  Disappearance and positive wave changes of these potentials at the level of responsible lesions and slow conduction velocity under 40 m indicated an unsatisfactory outcome.  Localized-lesion cases diagnosed by ESCPs had excellent results, significantly more so than extensive-lesion cases, regardless of operative methods.  In 123 cases, 76% were found to have localized lesions, while the other 24% showed extensive lesions.  Concerning the difference between CSM and OPLL, 54% of OPLL and only 14% of CSM demonstrated extensive lesions.
Cerebral blood flow and oxygen metabolism in patients with vascular dementia of the Binswanger type.  We performed clinical and neuroradiologic studies, including positron emission tomography, in five patients with vascular dementia of the Binswanger type.  The clinical features of these cases consisted of slowly progressive dementia, together with vascular risk factors such as hypertension and often a history of minor stroke, and characteristic white matter lesions on brain computed tomograms or magnetic resonance images.  Digital subtraction angiography of the cervical and intracranial arteries demonstrated no occlusive lesion in any patient.  Both cerebral blood flow and the cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen were markedly reduced in the white matter (54-77% of control values), and both were decreased in the parietal (73% of control), frontal (74-80%), and temporal (74-83%) cortices, where no abnormalities were detected by brain computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging.  We conclude that vascular dementia of the Binswanger type may be caused by disconnection between the cerebral cortex and subcortical structures due to ischemic damage in the white matter.
An open trial of high-dosage antioxidants in early Parkinson's disease.  High dosages of tocopherol and ascorbate were administered to patients with early Parkinson's disease as a preliminary open-labeled trial for the eventual controlled double-blind study evaluating antioxidants as a test of the endogenous toxin hypothesis of the etiology of Parkinson's disease.  The primary endpoint of the trial was the need to treat patients with levodopa.  The time when levodopa became necessary in the treated patients was compared with another group of patients followed elsewhere and not taking antioxidants.  The time when levodopa became necessary was extended by 2.5 y in the group taking antioxidants.  The results of this pilot study suggest that the progression of Parkinson's disease may be slowed by the administration of these antioxidants.  A large multicenter, controlled clinical trial currently underway in North America evaluating tocopherol and deprenyl has the potential to confirm these results.
Four chromosomal breakpoints and four new probes mark out a 10-cM region encompassing the fragile-X locus (FRAXA).  We report the validation and use of a cell hybrid panel which allowed us a rapid physical localization of new DNA probes in the vicinity of the fragile-X locus (FRAXA).  Seven regions are defined by this panel, two of which lie between DXS369 and DXS296, until now the closest genetic markers that flank FRAXA.  Of those two interesting regions, one is just distal to DXS369 and defined by probe 2-71 (DXS476), which is not polymorphic.  The next one contains probes St677 (DXS463) and 2-34 (DXS477), which are within 130 kb and both detect TaqI RFLPs.  The combined informativeness of these two probes is 30%.  We cloned from an irradiation-reduced hybrid line another new polymorphic probe, Do33 (DXS465; 42% heterozygosity).  This probe maps to the DXS296 region, proximal to a chromosomal breakpoint that corresponds to the Hunter syndrome locus (IDS).  The physical order is thus Cen-DXS369-DXS476-(DXS463,DXS477)-(DXS296, DXS465)-IDS-DXS304-tel.  We performed a linkage analysis for five of these markers in both the Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain families and in a large set of fragile-X families.  This establishes that DXS296 is distal to FRAXA.  The relative position of DXS463 and DXS477 with respect to FRAXA remains uncertain, but our results place them genetically halfway between DXS369 and DXS304.  Thus the DXS463-DXS477 cluster defines presently either the closest proximal or the closest distal polymorphic marker with respect to FRAXA.  The three new polymorphic probes described here have a combined heterozygosity of 60% and represent a major improvement for genetic analysis of fragile-X families, in particular for diagnostic applications.
Identification of a highly polymorphic microsatellite VNTR within the argininosuccinate synthetase locus: exclusion of the dystonia gene on 9q32-34 as the cause of dopa-responsive dystonia in a large kindred.  Dopa-responsive dystonia is a clinical variant of idiopathic torsion dystonia that is distinguished from other forms of dystonia by the frequent occurrence of parkinsonism, diurnal fluctuation of symptoms, and its dramatic therapeutic response to L-dopa.  Linkage of a gene causing classic dystonia in a large non-Jewish kindred (DYT1) and in a group of Ashkenazi Jewish families, to the gelsolin (GSN) and arginino-succinate synthetase (ASS) loci on chromosome 9q32-34, respectively, was recently determined.  Here we report the discovery of a highly informative (GT)n repeat VNTR polymorphism within the ASS locus.  Analysis of a large kindred with dopa-responsive dystonia, using this new polymorphism and conventional RFLPs for the 9q32-34 region, excludes loci in this region as a cause of this form of dystonia.  This provides proof of genetic heterogeneity between classic idiopathic torsion dystonia and dopa-responsive dystonia.
Sudden cervical pain: spontaneous cervical epidural hematoma.  Three cases of cervical epidural hematoma are reported.  Acute neck pain usually associated with a mild effort, closely followed by radicular pain and a neurologic deficit below the lesion is the typical presentation of this extremely rare and difficult diagnosis.  As prognosis depends on preoperative neurologic state, the authors emphasize the importance of prompt identification of this lesion.  The diagnosis is confirmed by computed tomography, and emergency neurosurgical laminectomy is mandatory.
Unconsciousness associated with midazolam and erythromycin.  An 8-yr-old boy suffering from an asymptomatic ventricular septal defect was given erythromycin for antibiotic prophylaxis before adenoidectomy.  Sixty minutes after premedication with oral midazolam 0.5 mg kg-1 and oral atropine 0.03 mg kg-1, an infusion of erythromycin 400 mg was started.  When 200 mg of erythromycin had been infused, the patient lost consciousness, but other vital functions remained normal.  After 45 min, he awakened spontaneously.  At the time the plasma concentration of midazolam was 134 ng ml-1.  In order to investigate possible interactions between midazolam and erythromycin, we studied the pharmacokinetics of midazolam in six children of the same age undergoing minor otolaryngological surgery.  The plasma concentration of midazolam in the patient who lost consciousness was significantly greater than in six other children without concomitant administration of erythromycin.  The altered pharmacokinetics of midazolam may result from reduced hepatic clearance of midazolam caused by an enzyme inhibiting drug, erythromycin.
Radiosurgery of acoustic neurinomas.  Eighty-five patients with acoustic neurinomas underwent stereotactic radiosurgery with the gamma unit at the University of Pittsburgh (Pittsburgh, PA) during its first 30 months of operation.  Neuroimaging studies performed in 40 patients with more than 1 year follow-up showed that tumors were smaller in 22 (55%), unchanged in 17 (43%), and larger in one (2%).  The 2-year actuarial rates for preservation of useful hearing and any hearing were 46% and 62%, respectively.  Previously undetected neuropathies of the trigeminal (n = 12) and facial nerves (n = 14) occurred 1 week to 1 year after radiosurgery (median, 7 and 6 months, respectively), and improved at median intervals of 13 and 8 months, respectively, after onset.  Hearing loss was significantly associated with increasing average tumor diameter (P = 0.04).  No deterioration of any cranial nerve function has yet developed in seven patients with average tumor diameters less than 10 mm.  Radiosurgery is an important treatment alternative for selected acoustic neurinoma patients.
Effects of discontinuation of phenytoin, carbamazepine, and valproate on concomitant antiepileptic medication.  We report a prospective, controlled study of the effects of the reduction and discontinuation of phenytoin (PHT) (22 patients), carbamazepine (CBZ) (23 patients), and valproate (VPA) (25 patients) with concomitant antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).  The principal changes in the serum concentrations of concomitant AEDs were (a) phenobarbital (PB) concentrations decreased by a mean of 30% on discontinuation of PHT; (b) total CBZ concentrations increased by a mean of 48% and free CBZ concentrations increased by a mean of 30% on discontinuation of PHT, with no change in CBZ-10, 11-epoxide (CBZ-E) concentrations; (c) VPA concentrations increased by a mean of 19% on discontinuation of PHT; (d) VPA concentrations increased by a mean of 42% on discontinuation of CBZ; (e) ethosuximide (ESM) concentrations increased by a mean of 48% on discontinuation of CBZ; (f) PHT concentrations decreased by a mean of 26% on discontinuation of CBZ; (g) PHT free fraction decreased from a mean of 0.11 to 0.07 on discontinuation of VPA; and (h) the mean concentrations of total and free CBZ increased by a mean of 10 and 16%, respectively, on VPA discontinuation, with a concomitant mean 24% decrease in total CBZ-E and a 22% decrease in free CBZ-E.  Apart from the decrease in PB concentrations on PHT discontinuation, all significant changes had occurred by 1 week after the end of AED discontinuation.  The implication for clinical practice is that a serum AED concentration at this time reflects the new steady state.  Free concentrations did not add any clinically useful information to that gained from analysis of total serum concentrations.
Cognitive function and time-of-day variation in serum carbamazepine concentration in epileptic patients treated with monotherapy.  Different parameters of antiepileptic drug (AED) treatment have been shown to affect cognitive function.  The drug, dose, and duration of treatment have been studied.  The present study assessed cognitive function in relation to time-of-day variation in serum carbamazepine (CBZ) concentration in epileptic patients treated with monotherapy.  We studied 10 males and 12 females with a mean age of 36 years and a mean duration of CBZ-therapy of 4.4 years.  Patients had been seizure-free for at least 1 month and took two daily CBZ doses.  The test battery included tests of motor speed, reaction time, attention, and memory.  In the experimental design, the subjects were tested twice at times close to expected daily maximum and minimum serum CBZ concentration.  They were studied in two balanced blocks (block 1 tested at 8 a.m.  and noon, block 2 tested at noon and 8 p.m.).  Blood samples were collected every 2 hr from 8 a.m.  to 8 p.m.  The subjects showed significant differences in serum CBZ concentration between testing times, with suggested maximum concentration between 10 a.m.  and noon.  The test battery showed no consistent differences between performance at times of high versus low serum concentration.  A supplementary analysis of correlations between mean performance level on cognitive tests and variables related to CBZ treatment did not show consistent trends.
Immunologic aspects of carbamazepine treatment in epileptic patients.  Immune abnormalities have been found in epileptic patients receiving antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).  Phenytoin (PHT) produces a decrease in serum IgA and IgM levels and a decrease in blastic transformation of circulating lymphocytes stimulated with phytohemoagglutinin (PHA).  The effects of carbamazepine (CBZ) on the immune response are still conflicting.  To elucidate the effects of CBZ on some immunologic parameters, serum concentrations of IgA, IgG, IgM, the phagocytosis and killing properties of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs), the cytotoxic activity of natural killer cells and the response of lymphocytes to mitogenic agents were studied.  Forty healthy individuals and 39 epileptic patients treated with carbamazepine (CBZ) monotherapy (age range 18-40 years) entered the study.  Student's t test was used to evaluate the data.  CBZ had no effect on the serum immunoglobulin concentrations or on lymphocytic reactivity to phytohemoagglutinin (PHA) mitogen.  CBZ produced a significant enhancement of phagocytosis and killing properties of PMNs and an increase in natural killer (NK) cell activity.  Therefore, a negative effect of CBZ therapy on the immune system was not observed in this study.
Effect of felbamate on plasma levels of carbamazepine and its metabolites.  Felbamate (FBM) is a novel antiepileptic drug (AED) currently undergoing clinical evaluation in the United States.  During a controlled clinical trial conducted at the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, FBM was added to constant carbamazepine (CBZ) monotherapy.  CBZ total concentrations were reduced during active FBM treatment (mean reduction 25%, range 10-42%, p less than 0.001).  The effect was evident after the first week of treatment and reached a plateau in 2-4 weeks.  To clarify the interaction mechanism, free and total concentrations of CBZ and its plasma metabolites were determined by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and ultrafiltration in four patients.  In these patients, FBM treatment reduced CBZ concentrations and increased CBZ-epoxide (CBZ-E) concentrations (p less than 0.01).  Free fractions of all compounds were unmodified.  FBM appears to be capable of inducing CBZ metabolism.  CBZ-FBM interaction may be clinically relevant.
Double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over trial of progabide as add-on therapy in epileptic patients.  In a double-blind, cross-over trial, progabide (PGB) and placebo were compared as add-on therapy in 59 patients with moderate to severe epilepsy.  Eight patients did not complete the study, 4 because of adverse drug reactions (elevation of liver transaminases, 2; gastritis, 1; and acute psychosis, 1) and 4 because of administrative reasons.  Among the remaining 51 patients, seizure frequency was reduced greater than 50% in 18 patients with PGB treatment and in 8 patients with placebo (p less than 0.05).  The number of days with seizures was significantly (p = 0.034) reduced during PGB treatment.  Both patients' and physicians' preferences at the end of the trial were in favor (p less than 0.01) of PGB.  Mild clinical side effects were present in 54.7% of the patients treated with PGB and in 37.7% with placebo.  Increase in liver transaminases was observed in 2 patients during the double-blind study and in 1 during the follow-up period.  Our data show that PGB, as previously reported, is useful in 30-40% of patients who are not responding completely to other antiepileptic drugs (AEDs).  The compound is well tolerated, but liver function must be monitored.
Development and reversal of contingent inefficacy and tolerance to the anticonvulsant effects of carbamazepine.  The relationship of the timing of drug administration to anticonvulsant efficacy against amygdala kindled seizures was studied.  During kindling development, rats received carbamazepine (CBZ, 15mg/kg) before (CBZ-before) or after each amygdala stimulation (CBZ-after).  After kindling to full seizures, when all animals were given CBZ before the stimulation, only the CBZ-after group showed a good anticonvulsant response.  The rats that had received CBZ before (during development of kindled seizures) remained unresponsive to CBZ treatment (contingent inefficacy).  When drug-naive or CBZ-after animals repeatedly received CBZ before electrical stimulation, they developed tolerance to its anticonvulsant effects (contingent tolerance).  The tolerance could be reversed by a period of treatment with CBZ-after or by kindling the animal drug-free, but not by CBZ administration alone or by time off from both drug and seizures.  These findings suggest that inefficacy and tolerance to CBZ may be affected by the temporal contingencies of drug administration and that responsiveness can be reinstated by altering these contingencies.
Kindling susceptibility and genetic seizure predisposition in inbred mice.  Olfactory bulb kindling rates were studied in two inbred strains of genetically seizure-prone mice (DBA/2 and El) and in three non-epileptic inbred strains [C57BL/6 (B6), ddY, and C3H/He (C3H)].  None of the DBA/2 mice had been stimulated to seizure before or during the kindling and all mice were studied at 4-6 weeks of age, before development of spontaneous or movement-induced seizure activity in the El strain.  The audiogenically seizure-susceptible DBA/2 mice required the fewest number of stimulations to reach stage 5 seizure (mean +/- SE = 4.0 +/- 0.6).  The nonepileptic C3H mice required the most stimulations to reach stage 5 seizures (22.6 +/- 1.4).  Kindling rates for B6 (9.6 +/- 0.6), El (14.8 +/- 1.1), and ddY (18.5 +/- 1.0) strains were intermediate, and the kindling rate for each strain was significantly different from that of the other strains.  These findings show that the seizure-susceptible El mouse kindles more rapidly than the genetically similar but nonepileptic ddY control and suggest that an inherited seizure susceptibility accelerates the kindling rate.  Nonepileptic B6 mice kindled more rapidly than El mice, however, suggesting that genetic factors other than those that influence seizure susceptibility are of primary importance in the determination of the kindling rate.
Changes of hippocampal glucose utilization subsequent to amygdaloid-kindled generalized seizures.  Local changes in cerebral glucose utilization during the postictal phase of amygdaloid-kindled generalized seizures were studied with the quantitative autoradiographic 2-[14C]deoxyglucose method in conscious rats.  Measurement was initiated either just after termination of a behavioral seizure (GS-I) or 30 s after seizure termination (GS-II) to determine dynamic metabolic changes in the postictal phase.  Although glucose utilization of the neocortex was remarkably depressed in both GS-I and GS-II, that of the hippocampus significantly increased in GS-I and then decreased in GS-II as compared with control.  These changes of hippocampal glucose utilization were observed in all sectors of the pyramidal cell layer (CA 1-4) and in the molecular layer.  Because metabolic changes associated with development of amygdaloid-kindled seizures begin in the limbic structures including the hippocampus, the transient increase in hippocampal glucose utilization observed in the early postictal phase indicates that the hippocampus is one of the key structures not only for initiating and maintaining but also for terminating kindled seizures.
Panic disorder in seizure patients: a diagnostic pitfall.  Panic disorder is a psychiatric diagnosis whose main feature is paroxysmal attacks of anxiety that strike suddenly without apparent provocation.  Physicians explain the attacks as an ictal phenomenon in patients with known seizures because of their similarities to complex partial seizures.  We report eight patients with seizures and panic disorder.  Recognition of a second diagnostic entity resulted in a beneficial change in treatment in six of the eight.  We did not find an increased incidence of panic disorder in our seizure clinic population as compared with the general population.
Effect of epilepsy and sleep deprivation on the rate of benign epileptiform transients of sleep.  Seventy-eight individuals with EEG records containing benign epileptiform transients of sleep (BETS) were identified among 7,400 records reviewed in our laboratory in a 6-year period.  The records contained no other abnormality in 51 patients (65%).  Genuine epileptiform discharges were found in the records of 19 patients; 14 had a history of epilepsy.  Thirty-five patients (45%) had a proven history of epilepsy with antiepileptic drug (AED) therapy.  In the records of these patients, the mean number of BETS per unit of time was significantly higher (11.88 +/- 2) than in the record of the rest of the laboratory population with BETS (6.89 +/- 0.9) (p less than 0.02).  Among five conventional surface montages, ipsilateral ear referential montage (IERM) showed a significantly higher number of BETS per unit of time than did any other surface montage used in the study.  Thirty-nine records (50%) were performed after sleep deprivation (SD).  When only IERM was considered, SD records showed a significantly higher number of BETS per unit of time (7.36 +/- 1.1) than did non-SD records (3.89 +/- 0.69) (p less than 0.01).  Our findings support the general consensus that individual BETS may be normal variants, but a high occurrence of BETS in the record should raise suspicion of underlying epilepsy.
Dreams and epilepsy.  The relationship between dreams and epilepsy is illustrated by two patients whose awake epileptic seizures and recurrent dreams during night sleep had similar content.  In both of our cases the EEG showed right anterior temporal spike discharge, suggesting a role for the temporal lobe in the association between dreams and seizures.
Epilepsy with continuous spike-waves during slow sleep and its treatment.  Five children with epilepsy with "continuous spike-waves during slow sleep" (CSWS) are reported.  The main clinical features of CSWS include (a) onset between 5 and 7 years of age, (b) the occurrence of several types of seizure (i.e., partial motor, generalized motor, and atypical absence), and (c) the presence of language disturbances and abnormal behavior based on emotional impairment.  The EEG findings were characterized by sleep tracings showing almost continuous (greater than 95%), diffuse slow spike and wave activity.  After treatment with valproate (VPA) (or ethosuximide, ESM) and clonazepam (CZP), the spike and wave complex status disappeared.  Symptoms and signs of the CSWS also decreased.  We suggest that combined treatment is an appropriate treatment for CSWS.
Sexual behavior of a sample of females with epilepsy.  A sample of 700 female epileptic outpatients was examined between 1985 and 1987.  The incidence of psychosexual disorders was 18%.  Epileptic females with psychosexual disorders were compared with epileptic females without sexual disorders and with normal female controls on selected clinical and EEG parameters.  Epileptic females with sexual disorders showed: lower marriage rates, a longer duration of illness, sexually colored prodromata, predominance of partial complex seizures (83%) and a higher incidence of menstrual abnormalities.  Hyposexuality and exhibitionism were the psychosexual disorders most frequently noted.  Temporal lobe EEG abnormalities were significantly higher.
Attitudes of major employers toward the employment of people with epilepsy: a 30-year study.  Beginning in 1956, major San Francisco Bay area employers were sampled at 10-year intervals for a 30-year period to assess attitudes toward the employment of epileptic workers.  In this time, we documented a trend of sustained positive change that appears to validate the efforts of organizations that have focused on raising public awareness of this disorder.
Antiepileptic drug monitoring at the epilepsy clinic: a prospective evaluation.  To assess the value of on site therapeutic drug monitoring at the epilepsy clinic, management decisions were recorded before and immediately after antiepileptic drug (AED) concentrations became available.  In the first year of this prospective study, 632 [277 carbamazepine (CBZ), 170 phenytoin (PHT), 113 valproate (VPA), and 72 phenobarbital (PB)] assays were performed during 488 clinic attendances in 182 actively managed epileptic patients.  The results of drug analysis led to alterations in management at 114 patients visits, i.e., 23% of those monitored.  Dosage was increased in response to the circulating AED concentration in 12% of consultations and decreased in another 7.5%.  Unsuspected poor compliance was uncovered in eight patients, and in three others an AED was added or discontinued on the basis of the assay result.  The time of the next appointment was rearranged in 58 attendances.  Only 50% of results were in the "therapeutic" ranges for the four major AEDs.  Dosage was adjusted (50 up, 16 down) after 54% of low results.  "Therapeutic" levels were followed by a change in AED dose (52 up, 31 down) in 26%.  Only 29% of concentrations above the "therapeutic" range persuaded the doctor to alter the dosage regimen, and in 20% of these an increase in dose was recommended.  On-site AED monitoring had an immediate impact on clinical decision-making in greater than 23% of consultations but in a form more subtle than the simple quest for a therapeutic result.
Effects of lactulose and lactitol on protein digestion and metabolism in conventional and germ free animal models: relevance of the results to their use in the treatment of portosystemic encephalopathy.  Protein digestion and metabolism have been studied in laboratory rats and miniature pigs to investigate the mechanisms of action of lactulose and lactitol when used in the treatment of patients with portosystemic encephalopathy.  Lactulose (beta-D-galactopyranosyl-(1----4)-beta-D-fructofuranose) and lactitol (beta-D-galactopyranosyl-(1----4)-D-glucitol) increased the excretion of nitrogenous material in the faeces and decreased nitrogen excretion in the urine in a similar degree to that reported for human patients.  In studies with germ free rats given lactulose no such effect was observed, suggesting that, for lactulose at least, these effects are mediated by the gut flora.  Measurement of the alpha-, epsilon-diaminopimelic acid content of the faeces confirmed that the enhancement of faecal nitrogen was due to an increased contribution from bacteria.  The similarity in the results for lactulose and lactitol suggests that, from the perspective of protein metabolism, lactitol acts in a similar way to lactulose in the treatment of portosystemic encephalopathy.
The relation of pain to depression among institutionalized aged.  Nursing home and congregate apartment residents (N = 598) were classified on the basis of a DSM-IIIR symptom checklist as suffering possible major, minor, or no depression; they also completed the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) and the Profile of Mood States (POMS).  Possible major depressives reported more intense pain and a greater number of localized pain complaints than did minor depressives; nondepressed individuals reported the least intense pain and fewest localized complaints.  The effect remained strong even when functional disability and health status were controlled statistically.  Both pain intensity and number of localized complaints were correlated with GDS and POMS factor scores, but strength and direction of associations varied with level of depression.  Item-by-item examination of localized complaints again indicated that more depressed individuals were more likely to report pain, particularly where physicians had identified a physical problem that might account for the pain.  Results are compared with previous research on pain among younger individuals.  Implications for treatment of depressed elderly are discussed.
Oestrogen and progesterone receptors in acoustic neuroma.  Tissue samples from fourteen consecutive (8 male: 6 female) acoustic neuromas were assayed for hormone receptors using either a monoclonal antibody (MA), dextran coated charcoal (DCC) or isoelectric focusing (IEF) technique.  In this series there were no unequivocally positive results, a finding at variance with previously published results.
Effect of nicardipine on somatosensory evoked potentials in patients with acute cerebral infarction.  We evaluated the effect of nicardipine, a calcium channel blocker, on somatosensory evoked potentials (SEP) in 26 patients with acute cerebral infarction.  Post treatment, 58% (15/26) of the N20 and P25 latencies were prolonged in the affected hemispheres; 8% (2/26) were shortened; and 35% (9/26) did not change.  The mean N20 and P25 latencies were significantly prolonged two hours post treatment in the affected hemisphere (N20, P less than 0.01, P25 P less than 0.01).  Nicardipine (Ni) had no effect on SEP components in the intact hemispheres.  Seventy five per cent of the 12 patients with hypertension had a decrease in blood pressure (BP) after taking nicardipine, but there were no undesirable side effects or worsening of neurological signs.  Our study demonstrates that nicardipine prolongs the latencies of short-latency components of SEP in the affected hemisphere after acute ischaemic stroke and also decreases BP.  These observations suggest that nicardipine therapy might impair neuronal function in the ischaemic zone.
Platelet monoamine oxidase B activity in parkinsonian patients.  Monoamine oxidase B (MAO B) plays a pivotal role in N-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) induced Parkinsonism.  An increased MAO B activity in platelets of patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) is reported in this study.  The possibility that high MAO B activity may represent a trait of vulnerability for PD by enhancing the neurotoxic effects of environmental compounds is discussed.
Specificity of affective and autonomic symptoms of depression in Parkinson's disease.  Previous investigators have suggested that numerous symptoms used to diagnose depression, such as sleep or appetite disturbance, are non-specific in medically ill patients, and alternative diagnostic criteria should be developed.  In the study this hypothesis was tested in Parkinson's disease (PD) by comparing patients with PD who reported a depressive mood with patients having PD but without a depressive mood.  Depressed patients showed a significantly higher frequency of both autonomic and affective symptoms of depression.  Depressed patients with PD reported a significantly higher frequency of worrying, brooding, loss of interest, hopelessness, suicidal tendencies, social withdrawal, self-depreciation, ideas of reference, anxiety symptoms, loss of appetite, initial and middle insomnia, and loss of libido when compared with non-depressed patients.  No significant between-group differences, however, were observed in the frequency of anergia, motor retardation, and early morning awakening.
Neurophysiological observations on corticospinal projections to the upper limb in subjects with Rett syndrome.  The aim of the present study was to investigate the excitability of corticospinal neurons and the integrity of their projections to the alpha motor neurons through the corticospinal tract in subjects of different ages with Rett syndrome.  Electromagnetic stimulation of the motor cortex and cervical motor roots was used to evoke motor action potentials in the biceps brachii and hypothenar muscles.  The phasic stretch reflex in the biceps brachii was also recorded to study the excitability of spinal alpha motor neurons.  Motor cortex stimulation evoked motor action potentials at low threshold and with abnormally short latencies and prolonged durations.  In contrast cervical motor root stimulation resulted in responses of normal latency and duration.  The phasic stretch reflex had a low threshold, short latency and prolonged duration.  It is concluded that in Rett syndrome the corticospinal pathway is intact.  The results suggest disordered synaptic control of the Betz cell of the motor cortex and/or the spinal alpha motor neuron, although the involvement of the latter might be a consequence of dysfunction in supraspinal descending motor pathways.
Stroke rehabilitation: Australian patient profile and functional outcome.  A prospective, multi-institutional, population based study identified 1274 non-surgical stroke admissions to all hospitals in a major Australian city during 1984.  The demographic and diagnostic profile and the nature of functional recovery of all 258 first stroke survivors who were referred for inpatient rehabilitation are presented.  The median duration of rehabilitation stay was 49 days.  The mean functional independence score, as measured on a modified Barthel Index at admission was 44, compared with 78 on discharge, a mean improvement of 34.  Stair climbing had the lowest mean value on admission (12), while bowel control had the lowest residual deficit on discharge (95).  The stroke study group was representative of the unimpaired aged population in all respects except ethnicity, where differences are attributed to age.  The variables identified as significant are; side and severity of paralysis, age and sex, marital status and ethnicity.  Stroke rehabilitation outcome was not influenced by etiology, site of lesion, arterial distribution, occupation or education.
Status of cochlear implantation in children. American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery Subcommittee on Cochlear implants.  The cochlear implant is a medical device, part of which is placed surgically, that uses electrical stimulation to provide hearing.  For almost a decade, investigational studies have been ongoing to define its safety and efficacy in profoundly deaf children.  During this period, more than 500 children aged 2 through 17 years have been implanted with either a single-electrode or multielectrode device.  Extensive auditory, speech, educational, and psychologic testing has been performed before and after implantation.  Results show that the cochlear implant provides auditory detection over much of the speech signal.  Compared with the preimplant period, there is significant improvement in auditory discrimination and speech production skills.  Limited open-set word and sentence recognition is possible for at least some children.  Complications with the device have been minimal.  The cochlear implant can provide sound to deaf children unable to benefit from hearing aids.  The complex assessment, rehabilitation, and parent counseling should be performed by centers with the multidisciplinary staffs necessary to provide effective care for patients with this specialized auditory prosthesis.
Phenotypic variability in glutaric aciduria type I: Report of fourteen cases in five Canadian Indian kindreds.  We describe 14 patients with glutaric aciduria type 1 in five Canadian Indian kindreds living in Manitoba and northwest Ontario.  The patients had marked clinical variability of the disease, even within families.  Eight followed the typical clinical course of normal early growth and development until the onset of neurologic abnormalities, often precipitated by infection, between 6 weeks and 7 1/2 months of age.  Five patients had early developmental delay; one was thought to be normal until 8 years of age.  Three patients died, seven are severely mentally and physically handicapped, and four have only mild mental retardation or incoordination.  Six patients had macrocephaly in the neonatal period.  Computed tomography was done for 12 patients, and findings were abnormal in 11.  Glutaric acid and 3-hydroxyglutaric acid were detected in increased amounts in the urine of all patients, but the concentrations were much lower than those in most other reported patients.  Glutaryl coenzyme A dehydrogenase activity in skin fibroblasts, interleukin-2-dependent lymphocytes, or both, ranged from 0% to 13% of control values.  There was no correlation between clinical severity and urine glutaric acid concentration or level of residual enzyme activity.  We recommend that organic acid analysis of the urine be done in patients with unexplained cerebral palsy-like disorders, especially if the computed tomographic scan is abnormal.  If there is suspicion of glutaric aciduria, glutaryl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase should be measured in fibroblasts or lymphocytes even if glutaric acid is not increased in the urine.
The management of mid-face fractures with intracranial injury.  Recent advances have radically changed the management of facial fractures.  CT scanning, extensive exposure, and rigid plate fixation in the setting of the trauma center have permitted early operation with improved results.  A subset of patients with facial fractures will also have intracranial injuries (ICI).  We sought to identify parameters associated with an increased risk for ICI.  We also sought to examine the safety and limits of early craniofacial repair in patients with intracranial injuries.  Of 114 mid-face fractures treated over a 1-year period, 43 (38%) had a concomitant ICI.  The majority, 36 (84%), were from motor vehicle accidents (MVA).  Frontal sinus and orbitoethmoid fractures were at the highest risk for ICI, although orbitozygomatic fractures caused by MVAs also had a surprisingly high incidence of ICI.  Our results show that early craniofacial repair can be performed safely with appropriate general surgical and neurosurgical support.
Feasibility of reversing benzodiazepine tolerance with flumazenil   To examine whether the benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil can reverse tolerance to benzodiazepines but without precipitating withdrawal seizures, the antiepileptic effect of flumazenil itself and its ability to reverse tolerance at a dose that would leave sufficient receptors free for the binding of benzodiazepines were investigated.  Electroencephalographic studies in 6 patients with partial and 6 with generalised seizures showed that flumazenil had a short (20 min) non-dose-dependent suppressant effect on epileptic discharges in those with partial seizures.  Receptor occupancy studies in 12 patients showed that 1.5 mg flumazenil given intravenously occupied 55% receptors, whereas 15 mg occupied nearly all receptors.  When 3 patients with partial seizures who had become tolerant to clonazepam were given 1.5 mg flumazenil, they were seizure-free for 6-21 days after the injection.  The value of intermittent therapy with a benzodiazepine antagonist for preventing or reversing tolerance to benzodiazepine agonists ought to be investigated further.
Carpal tunnel syndrome: correlations between pressure measurement and intraoperative electrophysiological nerve study.  In 19 carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) patients and 4 control subjects a catheter was introduced into the carpal tunnel and slowly retracted in 5 mm steps.  Pressure was measured with the continuous infusion technique.  In the same group of patients and controls, median nerve antidromic sensory action potential (aSAP) was detected intraoperatively stimulating proximally (S1), in the center (S2), and distally (S3) to the carpal tunnel and recording from the third finger (R).  Sensory conduction velocity (SCV) and aSAP amplitude were considered in S1-S2, S2-S3 and S3-R segments.  The intracarpal tunnel pressure was significantly higher in CTS patients than in controls, with the highest values located between 25 and 35 mm distal to the proximal border of the flexor retinaculum.  SCV and aSAP amplitude were also decreased most often in the distal part (S2-S3) of the carpal tunnel.
Vector short-latency somatosensory-evoked potentials after median nerve stimulation.  A new method has been developed for recording short-latency somatosensory-evoked potentials after median nerve stimulation.  Negative electrical forces recorded with three orthodiagonal bipolar electrodes in the neck had a direction opposite to that of impulse conduction in the proximal peripheral and cervical somatosensory pathway.  Sequential tracings of vectors opposite the electrical forces were made in three-dimensional display, thus reproducing the actual time sequence of electrical events in those structures.  Fixed generators such as the subcortical nuclei were also analyzed with this technique, and multiple generators of N13 potential (N13a and N13b) were visualized.  This technique may be useful in the functional evaluation of the somatosensory pathway in the cervical cord.
The painful shoulder: Part I. Extrinsic disorders.  Shoulder disorders are most commonly manifested by pain and limited function.  Careful history and examination help the physician localize the problem to the shoulder joint, the surrounding tissues or adjacent sites that can cause referred pain to the shoulder.  Common extrinsic causes of shoulder pain include postural problems and cervical spine disorders.
Tables for estimation of individual risks of fetal neural tube and ventral wall defects, incorporating prior probability, maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein levels, and ultrasonographic examination results.  Tables are provided for estimation of the risk of open spina bifida in patients who have elevated maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein levels but normal results on detailed anatomy ultrasonographic scan.  Risks are provided for various prior population risks, for various levels of elevated maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein, and for various assumptions about the sensitivity of ultrasonographic examination.  The formula used is based on sequential multiplication of odds with the use of Bayes' theorem, but an arbitrary reduction (to the power of 0.5) in the degree to which ultrasonographic information modifies the odds has been made to allow for the nonindependence of ultrasonography and maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein tests.  The wide range of resulting risks shows that the decision to offer amniocentesis after a negative scan should be individualized.
Relationship of laparoscopic findings to self-report of pelvic pain.  An assessment battery including standardized measures of behavioral and psychosocial factors associated with other chronic pain conditions was administered to 102 women scheduled for laparoscopic surgery.  Surgeons who were blinded to the patient's self-reported pain data completed the American Fertility Society classification for endometriosis and adhesions on the basis of observed physical disease.  Although American Fertility Society classification scores were significantly related to self-assignment into pain or no-pain groups, the extent of physical disease evaluated by this procedure was not significantly correlated with ratings of pain levels or a number of indexes of impairment.  The group of patients with laparoscopically diagnosed pathologic conditions reported higher pain levels and greater interference than the group who reported pain and had negative laparoscopic results; however, some women with observable pathologic conditions reported no pain symptoms.
Acute tolerance in morphine analgesia: continuous infusion and single injection in rats.  This study aimed to determine whether the decline of the analgesic effect of morphine with a continuous infusion or that after a single injection correlates with the changes in brain concentration of morphine.  The analgesic effect of morphine and its brain and serum concentrations were determined with a continuous 8-h infusion at a constant rate and after a single subcutaneous injection of the agent.  The analgesic effect was determined by measuring the threshold of motor response to noxious stimulation.  Brain and serum concentrations of morphine were detected by radioimmunoassay with the use of 125I-labeled morphine.  With the constant-rate (4 mg.kg-1.h-1, intravenous) morphine infusion, the peak of analgesia could not be maintained: the increase in the pain threshold at 2 h was 1,003 g and at 8h was 286 g (a decrease in analgesia by 72%, P less than 0.0002).  At the same time, the brain morphine concentration tended to increase, to 278 ng/g at 2 h and 329 ng/g at 8 h.  After the single morphine injection (6 mg/kg, subcutaneous), recovery from analgesia occurred at a much faster rate than did the decrease in morphine brain concentration; the decrease in pain threshold was 79% at 90 vs.  30 min after the injection (P less than 0.0001), and the corresponding decrease in brain concentration was 28% (NS).  The absence of correlation between analgesia and morphine brain concentration both with the constant-rate morphine infusion and after the single injection suggests the development of acute tolerance, which is pharmacodynamic in nature.
Effect of systemic medetomidine, an alpha 2 adrenoceptor agonist, on experimental pain in humans.  The effect of systemic (intravenous) medetomidine, an alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonist, on pain thresholds was studied in healthy human subjects (n = 6).  Medetomidine produced a dose-dependent (cumulative doses: 25 and 50 micrograms) sedative effect evaluated by visual analog scale.  Also, a dose-dependent decrease of blood pressure but not of heart rate was seen after administration of medetomidine.  Pain threshold to electric stimulation of the tooth pulp and cutaneous heat pain threshold were uninfluenced by medetomidine.  An index of cutaneous thermal sensitivity to innocuous stimuli, the width of the thermoneutral zone, also was uninfluenced by medetomidine.  Medetomidine produced a significant attenuation of the affective-motivational component (unpleasantness) of tourniquet-induced ischemic pain, whereas the sensory-discriminative component (pain magnitude estimate) of the ischemic pain was not attenuated.  The results suggest that systemic medetomidine alone at subanesthetic but sedative and hypotensive doses does not significantly influence the intensity and thresholds of experimental pain, whereas the affective-motivational component of pain can be attenuated.
Pupil-sparing oculomotor nerve palsy due to midbrain infarction.  Vasculopathic oculomotor nerve palsies with pupillary sparing are thought to be due to ischemic damage to the nerve in the subarachnoid space or the cavernous sinus.  We present two cases of patients with isolated pupil-sparing oculomotor nerve palsies due to midbrain infarcts.  Focal ischemic midbrain lesions should be considered in cases of pupil-sparing oculomotor nerve palsies.
Initial therapy of patients with Wilson's disease with tetrathiomolybdate.  Patients with Wilson's disease who present with acute neurological symptoms often become clinically worse when initially treated with penicillamine.  Other available anticopper drug therapies do not appear to offer a solution to this treatment problem.  We are developing and evaluating a new drug, ammonium tetrathiomolybdate for this purpose.  Theoretically, tetrathiomolybdate has optimal properties, including an immediate blockade of copper absorption and the property of forming complexes with copper in the blood, rendering the copper nontoxic.  In this article, we present results from six patients treated with tetrathiomolybdate for up to 8 weeks as initial therapy.  None of the five patients who had presented with acute neurological symptoms worsened.  Also presented are methods of assay, preliminary stability studies, and methods of evaluating therapeutic end points with respect to copper metabolism.
Cognitive and behavioural impairment among elderly people in institutions providing different levels of care.  OBJECTIVE: To compare the prevalence and degree of cognitive and behavioural impairment in elderly patients in institutions providing different levels of care.  DESIGN: Prevalence study.  SETTING: A nursing home, a home for the aged and psychogeriatric wards in a provincial psychiatric hospital.  PATIENTS: Only subjects 65 years of age or older were eligible for inclusion.  A random sample was selected comprising 25% of the residents in the nursing home and the home for the aged; of the 119 asked to participate 95 agreed (44 in the nursing home and 51 in the home for the aged).  All 50 on the psychogeriatric wards agreed to participate.  MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Kingston Dementia Rating Scale (KDRS).  RESULTS: An MMSE score of less than 24 (cognitive impairment) was given to 37 (84%) of the residents in the nursing home, 43 (84%) of those in the home for the aged and 48 (96%) of the patients in the psychiatric hospital; the corresponding numbers for a KDRS score of more than 0 (cognitive impairment) were 41 (93%), 48 (94%) and 50 (100%).  The seven patients receiving the highest level of care at the home for the aged (special care) had more behavioural problems than those in the psychiatric hospital did (p less than 0.001).  CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive and behavioural impairment was widespread in the three institutions regardless of the level of care.  When planning services and allocating resources government funding agencies should consider the degree and prevalence of such impairment among elderly people in institutions.
Evolution of energy expenditure and nitrogen excretion in severe head-injured patients.  OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to estimate the influence of therapeutic changes on the level of energy expenditure (EE) and N excretion in a homogeneous group of patients usually considered hypermetabolic.  DESIGN: EE and N excretion of head-injured patients were measured simultaneously at phases 1 and 2 (patients treated 4 +/- 3 and 18 +/- 8 days after injury, respectively).  SETTING: Acute care hospital.  PATIENTS: Eight severe head-injured patients, mean weight 63.1 +/- 6.1 (SD) kg, mean age 21 +/- 3.8 (SD) yr.  INTERVENTIONS: At phase 1, all patients were sedated with fentanyl (6.7 +/- 1.9 micrograms/kg.hr) plus flunitrazepam (9.1 +/- 4.8 micrograms/kg.hr) and were mechanically ventilated.  All patients received continuous total parenteral nutrition.  The nonprotein caloric intake averaged 1092 +/- 200 kcal/day, including 77% glucose and 23% fat (Intralipid 20%).  The total N intake averaged 7 +/- 5 g/day, consisting of crystalline amino acids.  At phase 2, no patient received any sedative and all were breathing spontaneously via tracheostomy.  All patients received parenteral and/or enteral nutrition.  The nonprotein caloric intake averaged 1929 +/- 200 kcal/day consisting of 65% carbohydrates and 35% fat.  The total N intake averaged 13 +/- 2 g/day.  MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The EE was significantly higher at phase 2 than at phase 1 (2121 vs.  1737 kcal), but the interindividual variability was low at both phases.  N excretion was high at the two periods of the study and not correlated to the level of EE.  The RQ was 0.75 at both periods, indicating predominant fat oxidation.  CONCLUSIONS: We could not demonstrate any parallelism in the evolution of EE and protein catabolism in head-injured patients.  The therapeutics (mechanical ventilation, sedation, and nutrition) have a major effect on EE but little on N excretion.
Noninvasive cerebral optical spectroscopy for monitoring cerebral oxygen delivery and hemodynamics.  OBJECTIVE: To present an algorithm for noninvasive measurement of cerebral oxygen saturation (cerebral oximetry) and cerebral hemodynamics with near infrared spectroscopy.  DESIGN: In vitro correlation of oximetry measurements with reference measurements; illustrative cases of hemodynamic and oximetric recordings.  SETTING: Tertiary care neuroscience ICU.  PATIENTS: Brain-injured patients with a prolonged, decreased level of consciousness chosen as illustrative examples.  INTERVENTIONS: Two-channel multiple wavelength diffuse infrared transmission spectroscopy was interfaced with the scalp using adhesive.  Transmission data were collected with gross superficial-to-deep spatial resolution.  Saturation calculation based on the deep signal was observed longitudinally in the patient.  With the same technology, arterial input and cerebral response functions, generated by iv tracer bolus, were deconvoluted to measure mean cerebral transit time.  MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: A positive linear regression fit between diffuse transmission oximetry and measured blood oxygen saturation over the range 23% to 99% (r2 = .98, p less than .001) was noted.  CONCLUSIONS: The approach used overcomes previously identified difficulties with cerebral oximetry, and demonstrates excellent in vitro correlation.  The technique can be performed clinically without difficulty.  A simultaneous measure of mean cortical transit time is possible.
Individual differences in children's response to pain: role of temperament and parental characteristics.  Sixty-five families were enlisted in a study exploring factors associated with distress behavior in 5-year-old children receiving diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis immunizations.  At a home visit 1 month before the immunization, the following measures were obtained: (1) the Behavioral Style Questionnaire, a measure of temperament: (2) parental self-reports of medically related attributes (eg.  "good patient"); (3) parental attitudes toward pain in children and responsiveness to their child's pain; and (4) parental prediction of distress at upcoming immunization.  The child's distress behavior during the immunization was evaluated using a modification of the Procedure Rating Scale-Revised and, after the procedure, the child's assessment of his or her pain was elicited using the Oucher.  Children's mean Procedure Rating Scale-Revised score was 2.57 of a possible 11.  Thirty-one (48%) had low (less than or equal to 1) and 7 (11%) had high distress scores (greater than or equal to 2 SD above the mean).  Factors positively correlated with distressed behavior included more "difficult child" cluster characteristics, the individual temperamental dimension of adaptability, but few parental attitudes and attributes.  Parent's predictions of distress were the strongest correlates.  These findings document the variation that children demonstrate in response to pain and offer some insight into associated innate and environmental factors.  These results imply that treatment strategies derived from parental knowledge and tailored to individual characteristics of the child may be most effective in alleviating pain-related distress in medical settings.
Methsuximide for intractable childhood seizures.  Methsuximide was added to the therapeutic regimens of 25 children with intractable epilepsy.  In 15 patients the drug was well tolerated and resulted in a 50% or greater reduction in seizure frequency.  No serious or irreversible adverse effects were seen.  Methsuximide is frequently overlooked and may be an effective adjunctive antiepileptic for children with intractable seizures.
Sucrose as an analgesic for newborn infants.  The effectiveness of sucrose as an analgesic agent for newborn infants was assessed during two standard painful hospital procedures: blood collection via heel lance and circumcision.  Infants who drank 2 mL of a 12% sucrose solution prior to blood collection cried 50% less during the blood collection procedure than did control infants who had received 2 mL of sterile water.  Crying of infants who ingested sucrose returned to baseline levels within 30 to 60 seconds after blood collection whereas control infants required 2.5 to 3.0 minutes to return to baseline.  Like findings were obtained for infants who received sucrose on a pacifier prior to and during circumcision.  Specifically, control infants who underwent a standard circumcision procedure without intervention cried 67% of the time.  A water-moistened pacifier reduced crying to 49% (P less than .01).  Crying was reduced further to 31% (P less than .05) by providing infants with a sucrose-flavored pacifier to suck.  These findings, which parallel results obtained in studies of pain in infant rats, provide a potent yet simple, benign intervention to help alleviate stress and pain routinely experienced by human infants.
Cerebral venography with MR.  The authors describe a two-dimensional time-of-flight magnetic resonance (MR) angiography technique to create projection venograms of the head.  The technique was applied to 27 healthy volunteers and 39 patients.  The superior sagittal and straight sinuses, the internal cerebral veins, and the Galen vein were visualized in all the volunteers.  Other veins were seen in a high percentage of subjects.  Systematic comparison of digital subtraction angiography (DSA) after intraarterial contrast medium injection and MR venography in patients showed good correlation between the two techniques.  MR venography proved helpful in identifying thrombosis or patency of cerebral veins and sinuses and showed collateral venous drainage and venous drainage from arteriovenous malformations.  There was good correlation between conventional contrast angiography and MR venography.  In conclusion, MR venography is considered reliable for showing the cerebral venous system and provides information additional to that of conventional spin-echo imaging.
Marked cerebrospinal fluid void: indicator of successful shunt in patients with suspected normal-pressure hydrocephalus.  The authors blindly reviewed the charts of 20 patients with normal-pressure hydrocephalus (a disease of unknown cause characterized radiologically as chronic communicating hydrocephalus and clinically by gait apraxia, dementia, and incontinence) who had undergone creation of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.  The initial clinical response to surgery was graded excellent, good, fair, or poor; 5-year follow-up was available in 55% of cases.  The magnetic resonance (MR) images obtained in these patients were also blindly reviewed for the magnitude of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow void (graded on the basis of extent rather than degree of signal loss) in the cerebral aqueduct.  A significant (P less than .003) correlation existed between good or excellent response to surgery and an increased CSF flow void.  The presence of associated deep white matter infarction on MR images did not correlate with a poor response to surgery.  On the basis of these findings, it is suggested that patients who fulfill the clinical criteria of NPH and have an increased CSF flow void undergo creation of a shunt.
Functional outcome measures in stroke rehabilitation.  I examine statistical considerations in the analysis of functional outcome following stroke and discuss the mathematical relation between improvement in function and discharge functional score.  I demonstrate mathematically that the predictor variables of improvement and discharge functional score are the same and that the regression coefficients for improvement and discharge functional score will be equal, except for the admission functional score, for which a mathematically defined relation exists.  I argue that the relation between admission functional score and discharge functional score must be positive and strong and that the relation between admission functional score and improvement must be negative for the stroke population.  I believe that an ignorance of statistical concepts, especially confounding, and of the differences between raw correlations, partial correlations, and predictors have led to much confusion in functional outcome research.
Platelet volume, aggregation, and adenosine triphosphate release in cerebral thrombosis.  We compared whole blood platelet aggregation, adenosine triphosphate release, platelet count, platelet crit (percentage volume of platelets), and mean platelet volume during the acute, subacute, and chronic periods of cerebral thrombosis in 22 patients with value in 29 controls.  During the acute and subacute periods, platelet aggregation, platelet count, platelet crit, and mean platelet volume were significantly less in the patients than in the controls (p less than 0.05-0.01) while the adenosine triphosphate release rate per volume of platelets was significantly greater (p less than 0.05).  During the acute period, infarct size showed a significant positive correlation with platelet aggregation (r = 0.59, p less than 0.01) and adenosine triphosphate release rate (r = 0.70, p less than 0.001) but a negative correlation with platelet count (r = -0.44, p less than 0.05).  Our results suggest that platelet aggregation is reduced during the acute period due to the consumption of platelets during thrombogenesis but that the remaining individual platelets are hyperactive.  Platelet consumption during the acute period increases with infarct size.  During the chronic period, platelet crit and mean platelet volume were significantly less in the patients than in the controls (p less than 0.01) while the adenosine triphosphate release rate was significantly greater (p less than 0.01), suggesting sustained platelet consumption and chronically enhanced secretion of individual platelets.
A novel treatment for ischemic intracranial hypertension in cats.  There is no accepted efficacious treatment for ischemic cerebral edema.  We show in a cat model of focal cerebral ischemia that infarct volume can be reduced (p less than 0.05) by ventriculocisternal perfusion with an oxygenated fluorochemical emulsion (bis-perfluorobutylethylene).  An accompanying effect of such ventriculocisternal perfusion is a reduction in intracranial pressure.  At 18 hours following the start of the perfusion, there was a significant (p less than 0.05) difference in intracranial pressure between nonperfused controls (mean 11.4 [range 2.3-23.0] torr, n = 6) and cats perfused with an oxygenated nutrient solution not containing fluorochemical (mean 11.3 [range 3.0-29.0] torr, n = 8) or animals perfused with the oxygenated fluorochemical emulsion (mean 2.21 [range 0-3.5] torr, n = 7).  Perfusion with this oxygenated fluorochemical emulsion warrants further study as a treatment for elevated intracranial pressure.
Persistence and remission of depressive symptoms in late life.  OBJECTIVE: The relation of poor health to the onset of depression symptoms in late life is well recognized, but little attention has been given to characteristics that might predict persistence or remission of depressive symptoms.  In previous analyses the authors found that increasing disability and declining health preceded the emergence of depressive symptoms in older community residents and accounted for 70% of the variance explained by discriminant analyses.  The aim of the present analysis was to examine the relevance of changes in health and disability to the persistence of depressive symptoms.  METHOD: A representative sample of 1,855 adults aged 65 or older were assessed with the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale at baseline.  Twenty-four months later, 1,577 individuals were available for a second assessment of depressive symptoms.  The characteristics of the 97 community residents whose depressive symptoms persisted over 24 months were compared to those of the 114 whose symptoms remitted.  RESULTS: Changes in health, differences in age, sleep disturbance, and added formal support services accounted for more than 30% of the variance between the persistently depressed and remission groups.  Advanced age and worsening health were associated with persistent symptoms, improved health with remission.  CONCLUSIONS: Previous studies have indicated that untoward changes in health and disability play a major role in the onset of depressive symptoms.  These findings show a substantial contribution to chronicity as well.
Cerebral palsy: why we must plan for survival.  The survival of children in the South East Thames region, born between 1970 and 1979 and diagnosed as having some form of cerebral palsy was investigated.  Of the 732 children studied, 651 (90%) are still alive, and hence cerebral palsy must be regarded as a condition with which people live rather than a condition of which they die.  Survival varies considerably among the different diagnostic groups: those suffering from spasic quadriplegia, dyskinetic and 'mixed' cerebral palsy are most severely affected.  Our evidence suggests that, though immobility and severe mental subnormality are the strongest predictors of mortality in children with cerebral palsy, the majority of even the most severely affected patients survive to adulthood.  It is therefore appropriate to plan for their survival by funding and evaluating programmes to maximise health, independence, and quality of life.
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia associated with cardiac syncope: long term treatment with permanent pacing and carbamazepine.  Glossopharyngeal neuralgia associated with cardiac syncope developed in a 53 year old man.  Symptoms were controlled with temporary and permanent transvenous pacing and carbamazepine.
99mTc HM-PAO SPECT in pediatric migraine.  99mTC HM-PAO SPECT brain imaging was performed during the headache-free period in 19 young migraineurs, affected by common migraine (CM, 10 cases), classic migraine (CLM, 6 cases) and hemiplegic migraine (HM, 3 cases).  SPECT findings were negative in all 10 patients with CM, in 3 cases of CLM and in 2 cases of HM.  Positive findings in the remaining 4 patients (3 cases of CLM and 1 of HM) showed a decreased tracer distribution in the temporo-occipital regions (2 cases) and parietal regions (2 cases): the two with decreased temporo-occipital perfusion reported prodromal symptoms exclusively contralateral to the areas of hypoperfusion.  An impaired regional cerebral vascular autoregulation may exist even during headache-free intervals in patients suffering from classic and hemiplegic migraine.
Cerebral vein thrombosis shown by MRI.  A 46 year old man with a short history of left facial pain and numbness, and subsequently headaches, had a normal physical examination and a normal CT scan of head.  Lumbar puncture yielded normal CSF under increased pressure.  MRI showed thrombosis of the superior sagittal sinus, subsequently confirmed by angiography.  MRI is a sensitive test for detecting intracranial venous thrombosis, and may be the investigation of choice when this disorder is suspected.
The cluster diathesis.  We present further evidence for a sympathetic defect of vasomotor control of the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) on the side of the headache during cluster periods.  In 119 cluster headache patients, utilizing transcranial Doppler, we measured CO2 reactivity of the major intracranial vessels, in and out of cluster.  Reactivity was significantly lower during the cluster period, but only in the ACA on the side of the headache.  Nineteen patients followed sequentially for a full cycle (ie/both in and out of a cluster period) showed the same changes.  In 3 out of 6 patients in an active cluster period, we describe a lesion on Gallium single-photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT) in the region of the cavernous sinus which fades as the patient moves out of cluster.  It is felt that this lesion may represent the cavernous sinus plexus lesion postulated as the central lesion in cluster.  Changes in the sympathetic outflow at this point could explain the changes we have described in ACA CO2 reactivity during cluster.
Relaxation training in school classes does not reduce headache complaints.  The effect of teacher-presented Progressive Relaxation Training (PRT) on headaches, fear of failure and school problems was studied in school students.  During ten physical education lessons, students received either PRT (n = 110) or placebo training (n = 92).  The effect of the training was investigated in students who indicated the presence of headaches in a pre-training diary.  No significant differences were found between both training groups regarding headache frequency, duration and intensity and the psychological variables.  On the basis of these and previous findings, it is recommended to present PRT to fairly small groups of self-selected subjects instead of complete classes.
Pharmacokinetics of tiaprofenic acid after oral administration in fasting patients during and between migraine attacks.  This study examined the pharmacokinetics of 300 mg of tiaprofenic acid, a NSAID belonging to the 2-arylpropionic class, as a single oral dose, in 10 migraine patients during and out of migraine attacks.  Plasma concentration of tiaprofenic acid was determined by HPLC analysis.  Drug absorption appeared to be the same during and out of migraine attacks (absorption half life: during attack, 0.249 +/- 0.122 hr; out of attack, 0.249 +/- 0.105 hr; maximum plasma concentration: during attack, 37.8 +/- 9.8 ug/ml; out of attack, 40.1 +/- 13.2 ug/ml).  The other pharmacokinetic parameters evaluated were not affected by headache attacks as well.  We conclude that tiaprofenic acid absorption and metabolism are not affected by migraine attacks.  Also, our data suggest that tiaprofenic acid might be useful in the treatment of migraine.
Paratope- and framework-related cross-reactive idiotopes on anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies.  Cross-reactive idiotopes are a possible target for therapeutical interventions in autoimmune diseases.  To investigate their role in the pathogenesis of experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis (EAMG) we analyzed the Id of rat anti-AChR mAb 6, 35, 61, 65 and a control myeloma protein IR27.  Anti-Id 6, 35, 61, 65 bound in a direct binding assay with various affinity to all rat anti-AChR mAb that were tested.  Anti-Id IR27 recognized none of the anti-AChR mAb.  The specificity of these crossreactions was confirmed by inhibition studies with anti-AChR mAb and two control rat myeloma proteins (IR27 and IR241).  In addition, the Id expression on mAb D6, a mouse anti-human AChR mAb was recognized by anti-Id 6, 35, and 65.  Anti-Id, except anti-Id IR27, bound to affinity purified IgG from the sera of rats with EAMG, but not to preimmune Lewis IgG.  These results suggest extensive sharing of idiotopes among anti-AChR mAb, which are also present in EAMG serum.  Anti-AChR mAb against the main immunogenic region (6, 35, 65) from different rat strains, shared at least one paratope-related cross-reactive idiotopes.  In the view of the fact that anti-main immunogenic region antibodies might form a predominant fraction of the polyclonal response against AChR, it is conceivable that an anti-Id recognizing these antibodies could have therapeutical applications as for example a selective immune absorbent or in immunotoxin therapy.
Skin and epidural recording of spinal somatosensory evoked potentials following median nerve stimulation: correlation between the absence of spinal N13 and impaired pain sense.  A clinical lesion study and intraoperative epidural recordings were made to test the origin and clinical significance of the spinal N13 and P13 of somatosensory evoked potentials (SEP) that follow median nerve stimulation.  Intraoperatively, the respective peak latencies of spinal P13 and N13 coincided with those of the N1 component of the dorsal cord potential and its phase reversed positivity.  On both the ventral and dorsal sides of the cervical epidural space, maximal amplitude was at the C5 vertebral level to which nerve input from the C6 dermatome is the main contributor.  The modality of sensory impairment in the hand dermatome was examined in selected patients with cervical lesions, who showed such normal conventional SEP components as Erb N9, far-field P9, P11, P14, N18 and cortical N20, with or without loss of spinal N13.  Statistically, the loss of spinal N13 was associated with decrease of pain sensation in the C6 dermatome.  This was interpreted as being due to damage to the central grey matter of the cord, including the dorsal horn.  Our results suggest the spinal N13 and P13 originate from the same source in the C6 spinal cord segment and that they are good indicators for the detection of centromedullary cervical cord damage.
The development of infratentorial atrophy in patients with idiopathic cerebellar ataxia of late onset: a CT study.  The development of infratentorial atrophy in six patients suffering from idiopathic cerebellar ataxia of late onset was studied by a retrospective evaluation of consecutive computed tomography (CT) scans.  Four patients had evidence of olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA) both on clinical testing and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  In these four patients, atrophy of the cerebellum and brain stem became visible at the same time and progressed in a roughly parallel manner, whereas in the remaining two the brain stem was left intact.  In all patients with OPCA, definite brain-stem atrophy was visible earlier than the appearance of non-cerebellar clinical symptoms.  The present data suggest that CT investigations at regular intervals may be of prognostic value in cerebellar ataxias.
Impairment of vertical motion detection and downgaze palsy due to rostral midbrain infarction.  We present two cases with acute onset of vertical gaze palsy, mainly consisting of impaired downgaze and apraxia of downward head movements, together with neuropsychological deficits (hypersomnia, impaired attention and disorders of memory and affective control).  CT and MRI revealed bilateral post-ischaemic lesions in the dorsomedial thalamus and the mesodiencephalic junction, dorsomedial to the red nucleus, thus being restricted to the territory of the posterior thalamosubthalamic paramedian artery, which includes the region of the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fascicle as the main premotor nucleus for the generation of vertical saccades.  In our patients, oculographic examination with electro-oculography and magnetic search coil recording showed severe impairment of downward more than upward saccades and only minor deficits of vertical pursuit and the vestibulo-ocular reflex.  Visual functions were normal, with one exception: a psychophysical test of motion perception revealed a significant deficit in the detection of vertical movements.  This could be due to a central adaptive mechanism which, in order to minimize oscillopsia, might elevate thresholds for vertical motion perception in cases of vertical gaze palsy.  As an alternative explanation, lesions within the midbrain tegmentum could have damaged subcortical visual pathways involved in motion perception.
Cerebral palsy and rhizotomy. A 3-year follow-up evaluation with gait analysis.  A recent increase in the popularity of selective rhizotomy for reduction of spasticity in cerebral palsy has led to a demand for more objective studies of outcome and long-term follow-up results.  The authors present the results of gait analysis on 14 children with spastic cerebral palsy, who underwent selective posterior rhizotomy in 1985.  Sagittal plane gait patterns were studied before surgery and at 1 and 3 years after surgery using a digital camera system.  The parameters measured included the range of motion at the knee and thigh, stride length, speed of walking, and cadence.  The range of motion at the knee was significantly increased at 1 year after surgery and further improved to a nearly normal range at 3 years after surgery.  In contrast, postoperative measurements of thigh range exceeded normal values at 1 year, but decreased toward normal range at 3 years.  While improvements in range of motion continued between Years 1 and 3, the children developed a more extended thigh and knee position, which indicated a more upright walking posture.  Stride length and speed of walking also improved, while cadence remained essentially unchanged.  This 3-year follow-up study, the first to examine rhizotomy using an objective approach, has provided some encouraging results regarding early functional outcome.
Spontaneous decompression of syringomyelia: magnetic resonance imaging findings. Case report.  The case of a 30-year-old woman with Chiari I malformation and a cervicothoracic syrinx is presented.  The patient was followed clinically over a 2 1/2-year period.  Spontaneous and complete resolution of the syrinx, as documented by serial magnetic resonance studies, was accompanied by only a minimal change in objective symptomatology.
Carbon monoxide-induced delayed amnesia, delayed neuronal death and change in acetylcholine concentration in mice.  We investigated the interrelationship of delayed amnesia, delayed neuronal death and changes in acetylcholine concentration induced by carbon monoxide (CO)-exposure in mice.  In the test for retention of the passive avoidance task, amnesia was observed 5 and 7 days after CO-exposure when the mice were exposed to CO 1 day after training; in the case when the mice were exposed to CO 5 and 7 days before training, amnesia was also observed in a retention test given 1 day after training.  The number of pyramidal cells in the hippocampal CA1 subfield was lower than that of the control 3, 5 and 7 days after CO-exposure.  But the neurodegeneration in the parietal cortex, area 1, was not observed until 7 days after CO-exposure.  The findings indicated that the amnesia and the neuronal death were produced after a delay when the mice were exposed to CO.  In addition, the delayed amnesia was closely related to the delayed neuronal death in the hippocampal CA1 subfield.  Moreover, [3H]glutamate and [3H]glycine binding sites did not change after CO-exposure but, 7 days after CO-exposure, the concentration of acetylcholine and the binding of [3H]quinuclidinyl benzilate in the frontal cortex and the striatum were found to have significantly changed, but those in the hippocampus did not show significant change.  Therefore, we suggest that delayed amnesia induced by CO-exposure may result from delayed neuronal death in the hippocampal CA1 subfield and dysfunction in the acetylcholinergic neurons, in the frontal cortex, the striatum and/or the hippocampus.
A self-administered hand symptom diagram for the diagnosis and epidemiologic study of carpal tunnel syndrome.  Noninvasive tests for carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) are of limited diagnostic value.  A self-administered hand symptom diagram has been developed for use in the diagnosis and epidemiologic study of CTS.  Diagrams are rated classic CTS, probable, possible or unlikely.  Diagram ratings were compared with nerve conduction diagnoses in 110 patients with upper extremity complaints.  A hand diagram rating of classic or probable CTS had sensitivity of 0.64, specificity of 0.73 and positive predictive value of 0.58.  The negative predictive value of an unlikely diagram was 0.91.  We conclude that the diagram is a useful diagnostic tool and may be valuable for occupational and population screening.
Motor neuron disease (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis).  Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is an insidiously developing, adult-onset, progressive anterior horn cell degeneration with associated degeneration of descending motor pathways.  It has been recognized as an important clinical syndrome since the middle of the 19th century.  Despite increasing clinical and research interest in this condition, its cause remains obscure, even in the broadest terms.  Epidemiologic characteristics of the disease have been interpreted as evidence of both genetic and environmental causes.  A major change in the view of this disease is the widely developing perception that it is a disease of elderly persons more than of middle-aged adults as was previously taught.  Etiologic hypotheses encompass a broad range of postulated pathophysiologic mechanisms, and we review these in detail.  The clinical limits of the disease can now be better defined by using modern diagnostic techniques.  Although interest in supportive symptomatic therapy is growing, no intervention has yet been shown to modify the biologically determined motor system degeneration.
Tourette syndrome and other tic disorders. Diagnosis, pathophysiology, and treatment.  In this report, we discuss the definition, characteristics, pathophysiology, and treatment of tic disorders with a major emphasis on Tourette syndrome.  Although the diagnosis of a tic disorder depends on the presence of motor and/or phonic tic(s), patients with these problems also have a variety of co-morbid features including obsessive-compulsive symptoms, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, behavioral difficulties, and learning disabilities.  Conservative estimates for Tourette syndrome suggest a prevalence rate of 0.1-1.0 per 1000.  This syndrome is inherited in a sex-influenced autosomal dominant pattern with either chronic multiple tic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder as alternative phenotypes of the putative gene.  Current evidence continues to support a pathophysiologic mechanism involving synaptic neurotransmission, with the dopaminergic system as a primary candidate.  Therapeutically, it is essential to clarify whether a patient's problems are related to tics or associated behavioral difficulties.  Pharmacotherapy for motor and phonic tics is strictly symptomatic and should be reserved for those with functionally disabling symptoms.  A comprehensive individualized treatment program is often required in the care of individuals with tic disorders.
Effect of hydrocephalus on prostaglandins and thromboxane B2 in ventricular cerebrospinal fluid.  The concentrations of prostaglandin F2 alpha, prostaglandin E2, 6-ketoprostaglandin F1 alpha (prostacyclin metabolite), and thromboxane B2 were assayed in ventricular cerebrospinal fluid obtained from 28 patients with hydrocephalus (17 obstructive, 11 communicating).  Seven patients received dexamethasone or hydrocortisone on the day of sampling.  No patient received nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory compounds for 48 hours before sampling.  The median values did not differ significantly between the two types of hydrocephalus or from the concentrations in lumbar cerebrospinal fluid obtained from patients without intracranial pathology during lumbar myelography for possible lumbar disc disease.  Hence, there is no evidence that eicosanoids accumulate in the ventricles in hydrocephalus, and it is unlikely that they have a significant role in its symptomatology.
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy syndrome: consensus report of an ad hoc committee of the American Association for Hand Surgery on the definition of reflex sympathetic dystrophy syndrome.  This report proposes that reflex sympathetic dystrophy be defined as a pain syndrome in which the pain is accompanied by loss of function and evidence of autonomic dysfunction.  In the clinical setting, this diagnosis is usually associated with other anatomic and psychological diagnoses and may be associated with a variety of systemic illnesses and medicolegal factors.  All components should be assessed before a treatment plan is established.  Priorities should go to emergency care, acute injuries, and systemic illness, psychiatric problems, and chronic anatomic problems, in that order.  Early, accurate diagnosis improves prognosis.
Congenital demyelinating motor and sensory neuropathy with focally folded myelin sheaths.  Six patients (5 index cases and 1 sib) with a congenital motor and sensory neuropathy are described.  The clinical, genetic and electrophysiological features resembled Dejerine-Sottas disease or hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN) type III.  Sural nerve biopsy of 5 patients revealed segmental demyelination and remyelination with hypertrophic changes, although onion bulbs were not as ubiquitous as in classical HMSN type III.  A striking discriminating feature from HMSN type III was an abundance of focal myelin thickenings (tomacula) present in nearly all teased fibres.  Possible pathogenic implications are discussed.  These cases corroborate the heterogeneity of congenital motor and sensory neuropathies.
Experiential phenomena of temporal lobe epilepsy. Facts and hypotheses.  Experiential phenomena that occur in temporal lobe seizures and can be reproduced by electrical stimulation of temporal lobe structures typically encompass perceptual, mnemonic and affective features, either in combination or in isolation, which commonly relate to the patient's individual past experience.  These phenomena raise interesting questions concerning brain mechanisms involved in human psychophysiology.  The anatomical substrates for the evocation of these phenomena are widely distributed within the temporal lobe and include temporal isocortex and limbic structures (amygdala, hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus).  Arguments are presented which indicate that experiential phenomena are positive expressions of temporal lobe and limbic function and do not result from its ictal paralysis.  Recent concepts of parallel distributed processing (Rumelhart and McClelland, 1986) and the importance of parallel distributed cortical networks for higher cognitive functions (Goldman-Rakic, 1988a, b) provide a theoretical framework on which a hypothesis explaining experiential phenomena can be based.  In conformity with these concepts the hypothesis assumes that temporal lobe epileptic discharge or electrical stimulation of temporal lobe structures can induce the elaboration of patterns of excitation and inhibition in widely distributed neuronal networks, some of which are capable of forming a specific matrix representing the substrate of a given experience.  Neuronal networks engaged in parallel distributed processing (1) have the capacity to recreate the totality of a given experience when only a fragment of the network is activated, and (2) they tolerate a great deal of degradation by random inactivation of its components or by interference through random noise without serious loss of information content.  These features are compatible with the assumption that localized epileptic neuronal discharge or electrical stimulation involving some temporal lobe structures could create a matrix representing features of individual experience of the kind activated in the course of temporal lobe seizures.  Such an experience could, up to a certain limit, resist the degrading influence of mounting noise which inevitably must attend seizure discharge.
The role of diencephalic pathology in human memory disorder. Evidence from a penetrating paranasal brain injury.  A patient (B.J.) is reported who developed severe memory impairment following a penetrating brain injury caused by a snooker cue which entered through his left nostril into the basal regions of the brain.  Initially, his memory disorder had the clinical features of a dense amnesic syndrome, with both anterograde and retrograde amnesia, but B.J.  subsequently showed significant recovery of memory function.  Formal memory testing was carried out 21 months after injury.  This demonstrated marked verbal memory impairment, as severe as that seen in patients with the amnesic syndrome.  On nonverbal memory tests, his impairment was relatively mild and patchy.  His retrograde amnesia had regressed mainly to affect a 6 month period before the injury.  On other cognitive tasks, he performed at an average or above average level, and there was no neuropsychological evidence of frontal lobe dysfunction.  Neuroradiological investigations at various stages after his injury failed to demonstrate a lesion in any of the thalamic nuclei.  Magnetic resonance imaging showed a lesion in the hypothalamus in the region of the mamillary bodies.  Our study demonstrates that marked, relatively focal, memory disorder after diencephalic injury can occur without direct pathology to the body of the thalamus.  It also indicates that structures in or adjacent to the hypothalamus, such as the mamillary bodies, may play a more important role in human memory functioning than has hitherto been considered.
Single unit analysis of the human ventral thalamic nuclear group. Activity correlated with movement.  During neurosurgical operations for the relief of movement disorders, single thalamic neurons (n = 107) were identified with activity which was related to verbally cued active movements (movement-related cells).  The activity of each neuron was examined during different contralateral movements in order to determine the movement which was associated with the most consistent and pronounced change in firing rate (the optimal response).  The optimal response was determined by analysis of histograms of neuronal activity which were constructed by using the onset of EMG activity to synchronize successive repetitions of the active movement.  Movement-related cells exhibited optimal responses associated with such movements as making a fist, extension or flexion of the wrist, flexing or extending the elbow, pointing with the entire upper extremity, extending the tongue and lifting the leg.  Most movement-related cells recorded in a single parasagittal plane in an individual patient had optimal responses related to movements involving the same part of the body.  Movement-related cells were classified into those that were activated in response to somatosensory stimulation (combined cells, n = 20) and those which were not (voluntary cells, n = 87).  Combined cells were activated in advance of EMG activity during active movement and so could be distinguished from cells responding only to sensory stimulation (sensory cells).  Movement-related cells (combined and voluntary cell types) were located anterior to sensory cells and tended to show a mediolateral somatotopic organization parallel to that of sensory cells with cutaneous receptive fields.  Combined cells responded to somatosensory stimulation of the same part of the body as that involved in the active movement related to the optimal response of the cell.  Combined cells responding to passive movements of a joint always had their optimal response during active movement about the same joint.  The activity of combined cells during parkinsonian tremor may clarify the role of sensory feedback in tremor.
Spongiform encephalopathy transmitted experimentally from Creutzfeldt-Jakob and familial Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker diseases.  A comparison was made of the effects of experimental intracerebral inoculation into marmosets of brain homogenates from a case of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) and from a member of the Wo.  family with cerebral amyloid and spongiform encephalopathy--the Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker (GSS) syndrome.  All the inoculated marmosets developed spongiform encephalopathy (SE) after incubation times of 20-23 months in the CJD group and 25-32 months in the GSS group.  Subsequent passage from 1 affected animal in each group resulted in SE developing after 17 months incubation.  In every animal inoculated with CJD or GSS material and in the 2 passage experiments the most severely affected region of the brain was the thalamus which in all cases was almost totally occupied by vacuoles.  Other grey matter masses were less severely and less consistently affected.  Vacuolation was observed in the cerebellar granule cell layer as well as in the molecular layer and the brain stem was finely vacuolated in all cases.  There were only minor and inconsistent differences between the disease transmitted from CJD compared with GSS and some differences between the original transmissions and the SE caused by passaged inocula.  Severe astrocytic gliosis accompanied the spongiform changes but no amyloid was identified in any of the marmosets with experimentally transmitted disease.  The pathogenesis of the spongiform change in the thalamus was studied in a series of marmosets by light and electron microscopy 3-22 months after the intracerebral inoculation of CJD or GSS homogenates and was compared with controls.  Dilated irregularly-shaped cisternae and the large complex vacuoles typical of SE, present in abundance after 18 and 22 months incubation, were considered most probably to be derived from cisternae of neuronal smooth endoplasmic reticulum.
Hemodynamic effects of nasal CPAP examined by Doppler echocardiography.  The effects of incremental application of nasal continuous positive airway pressure (0 to 15 cm H2O) on heart rate, pulmonary artery pressure, and cardiac index were studied noninvasively by Doppler echocardiography.  By two-way analysis of variance within two groups (19 normal volunteers and six sleep apnea patients), no significant effects on heart rate, pulmonary artery pressure, ventricular size, or cardiac index could be found with increasing positive intrathoracic pressures and consequent lung hyperinflation.  In subjects with normal cardiac function, nasal CPAP is safe from a hemodynamic viewpoint.  This simple, repeatable and noninvasive technique may be used to assess the clinical safety and efficacy of prescribed nasal CPAP on cardiac hemodynamics in individual patients.
Respiratory muscle strength and control of ventilation in patients with neuromuscular disease.  To assess the relationship between respiratory mechanics and muscle strength and control of ventilation in patients with neuromuscular disease (NMD), we compared PImax and PEmax at RV, FRC and TLC, total respiratory elastance (Ers) with VT, TI, TT, VE, VT/TI, TI/TT, P.01, and P.01/(VT/TI) effective impedance in 21 patients with NMD and 21 healthy control (C) subjects, in seated position breathing room air.  Ers in NMD patients was 79 percent higher than in the C subjects.  While TI, TT, and VT in NMD were approximately half the corresponding C values, P.01 was 66 percent greater than in the C subjects (both p less than 0.001).  NMD PImax and PEmax ranged from 37 to 52 percent of corresponding C values, respectively.  Despite significant respiratory muscle weakness, only 7 of 16 patients demonstrated a PaCo2 greater than 45 mm Hg.  Ventilatory output in NMD was modulated by respiratory mechanics as indicated by the increased P.01.  In spite of muscle weakness, central drive in patients with NMD is not decreased, and in fact, is often increased.  VE is not an accurate measure of central drive because of abnormal intrinsic respiratory mechanics and the effects of conscious responses or reflexes.
Effect of cardiac output reduction on rate of desaturation in obstructive apnea.  The nadir of SaO2 during an obstructive apnea is dependent upon the apnea's duration and the rate of fall of saturation (dSaO2/dt).  We postulated that a low Q, such as in patients with congestive heart failure with sleep apnea, or a reduction in Q, as seen in some humans during obstructive sleep apnea, might steepen dSaO2/dt.  The mechanism postulated was lowering of SvO2 with increased pulmonary capillary blood oxygen uptake and faster depletion of alveolar oxygen.  This study examines dSaO2/dt following the onset of apnea in eight spontaneously breathing adult baboons.  Nonrepetitive obstructive apneas (30, 45, and 60 seconds) were created by clamping an indwelling cuffed endotracheal tube at the end of expiration.  Following baseline measurements, the animals were given a bolus of a rapid-acting beta-adrenergic blocker followed by continuous infusion to reduce cardiac output and to limit the cardiovascular response to obstructive asphyxia.  Fiberoptic catheters were used for continuous monitoring of SaO2, SvO2, and cardiac output.  Esophageal pressure and relative thoracic gas volume (Respitrace) were monitored to insure equivalence of lung volume at the onset of apnea.  Beta-adrenergic blockade reduced resting Q by a mean of 25 percent.  The blocked vs unblocked dSaO2/dt was 0.73 vs 0.72 percent/s, 0.76 vs 0.73 percent/s, and 0.70 vs 0.71 percent/s for 30-second, 45-second, and 60-second apneas, respectively.  Thus, mean dSaO2/dt for all durations of apneas was unaffected by beta-adrenergic blockade.  We concluded that dSaO2/dt is not influenced by limited Q preceding or induced by obstructive asphyxia.
Hyperprolactinemia increases and hypoprolactinemia decreases tyrosine hydroxylase messenger ribonucleic acid levels in the arcuate nuclei, but not the substantia nigra or zona incerta.  The effects of experimentally produced hypoprolactinemia and hyperprolactinemia on tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) mRNA signal levels were examined in dopaminergic neurons ovariectomized rats.  TH mRNA signal levels and relative TH quantity in the arcuate nuclei, zona incerta, and substantia nigra were evaluated by in situ hybridization and immunocytochemistry, respectively.  The catalytic activity of TH in the stalk-median eminence (SME) was determined from the in vitro rate of 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) accumulation after inhibiting DOPA decarboxylase with brocresine.  Chronic administration of bromocriptine (BROMO), a dopamine (DA) agonist, for 3 days reduced circulating rat PRL (rPRL) levels compared to those in the vehicle-treated controls.  BROMO treatment decreased TH mRNA signal levels in the arcuate nuclei, the intensity of TH immunostaining in the arcuate-median eminence area, and the rate of DOPA accumulation in the SME.  Concomitant administration of ovine PRL (oPRL) reversed the effects of BROMO on TH, resulting in markedly increased TH mRNA signal levels, intensity of TH immunostaining, and rate of DOPA accumulation.  Treatment with oPRL by itself for 3 days increased TH mRNA signal levels in the arcuate nuclei and TH activity in the SME, compared to vehicle.  Chronic treatment with haloperidol, a DA antagonist, increased circulating levels of endogenous rPRL and increased TH activity in the SME to values similar to those after oPRL treatment.  However, in contrast to oPRL, mRNA levels in the arcuate nuclei of haloperidol-treated rats were similar to levels in vehicle-treated animals.  To evaluate whether the effect of PRL on TH was species specific, oPRL or rPRL was continuously infused into the jugular vein using an osmotic minipump.  TH mRNA levels in the arcuate nuclei were elevated above control levels by either oPRL or rPRL administration.  TH mRNA levels in the DA perikarya located in the zona incerta and substantia nigra were not altered by treatment with a DA agonist, a DA antagonist, or PRL.  These results indicate that hypoprolactinemia or hyperprolactinemia can selectively reduce or augment, respectively, TH mRNA levels in the tuberoinfundibular dopaminergic neurons.  The alterations in TH mRNA content probably contribute to the decrease or increase in TH activity associated with hypoprolactinemia or hyperprolactinemia, respectively.
Humor, aggression, and aging.  Humor response to aggressive cartoons was investigated by using ratings of pain and funniness of cartoons by 154 young and elderly men and women.  No significant age differences were found; however, sex differences were found.  For both young and elderly females, an inverted-U described the relationship between pain and funniness ratings.  For young and elderly males, there was no relationship between pain and funniness.  This is a preliminary step in exploring age differences in humor but may be relevant for those working with elderly persons.
Approach to diagnosis of meningitis. Cerebrospinal fluid evaluation.  CSF evaluation is the single most important aspect of the laboratory diagnosis of meningitis.  Analysis of the CSF abnormalities produced by bacterial, mycobacterial, and fungal infections may greatly facilitate diagnosis and direct initial therapy.  Basic studies of CSF that should be performed in all patients with meningitis include measurement of pressure, cell count and white cell differential; determination of glucose and protein levels; Gram's stain; and culture.  In bacterial meningitis, Limulus lysate assay and tests to identify bacterial antigens may allow rapid diagnosis.  Where there is strong suspicion of tuberculous or fungal meningitis, CSF should also be submitted for acid-fast stain, India ink preparation, and cryptococcal antigen; unless contraindicated by increased intracranial pressure, large volumes (up to 40-50 mL) should be obtained for culture.  If a history of residence in the Southwest is elicited, complement-fixing antibodies to Coccidioides immitis should also be ordered.  Newer tests based on immunologic methods or gene amplification techniques hold great promise for diagnosis of infections caused by organisms that are difficult to culture or present in small numbers.  Despite the great value of lumbar puncture in the diagnosis of meningitis, injudicious use of the procedure may result in death from brain herniation.  Lumbar puncture should be avoided if focal neurologic findings suggest concomitant mass lesion, as in brain abscess, and lumbar puncture should be approached with great caution if meningitis is accompanied by evidence of significant intracranial hypertension.  Institution of antibiotic therapy for suspected meningitis should not be delayed while neuroradiologic studies are obtained to exclude abscess or while measures are instituted to reduce intracranial pressure.
Fluctuations of interictal brain imaging in repeated 123I-IMP SPECT scans in an epileptic patient.  Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) brain scans with N-isopropyl-(iodine 123) p-iodoamphetamine (123I-IMP) were performed three times in interictal periods in a 35-year-old man with intractable frontal lobe epilepsy and normal X-ray CT findings.  The first scan showed decreased 123I-IMP uptake in the right frontal lobe.  This abnormal image was regarded as the primary focus of his epilepsy on the basis of its regional agreement with focal epileptic discharges on EEGs.  In the second scan, he showed normal imaging, while the third scan showed the same abnormal image as before, in the right frontal lobe.  The frequency of his clinical seizures was almost unchanged during the intervals between scans and further EEGs recorded soon after each scan showed almost no changes in the basic activities and frequency of the epileptic discharges.  Such fluctuations in SPECT brain imaging suggest that the severity of functional inactivation underlying the focal hypoperfusion image as an epileptic focus may fluctuate considerably in the interictal state with no relation to the clinical features of epilepsy.
Aberrant regeneration in a case of syringobulbia: selective co-activation of abducens and facial nerves during saccades.  A patient suffering from syringobulbia and syringomyelia exhibited a phasic contraction of the ipsilateral facial muscles, mainly the levator labii, whenever he looked to the left or right.  Facial muscle twitches occurred exclusively with saccades.  The selective co-activation of abducens and facial nerves is interpreted as the result of bilateral misrouting of regenerating neurons from the parapontine reticular formation to the facial nerve in the tegmentum pontis.
Familial eating epilepsy.  Eating-related seizures affecting 20 individuals among 59 siblings belonging to nine families are presented.  The type of epilepsy was partial in all the affected individuals, and the seizures complex in 15 and simple in 5, secondarily generalized in the majority.  The onset of epilepsy, in most cases, was in the second decade of life.  A remarkable degree of intra-family consistency was observed with regard to age at onset, symptomatology of seizures and timing of eating seizures.  The study demonstrates sibling clustering in a partial epilepsy, implicating for the first time genetic susceptibility in the aetiology of eating epilepsy.
Transient ischaemic attacks and small-vessel disease. Dutch TIA Study Group   Histories and computed tomograms of 606 patients with transient cerebral ischaemia were studied.  All symptoms and signs had completely resolved within 24 hours, and any episodes suggestive of posterior fossa ischaemia were excluded.  Computed tomography, done after the clinical features had resolved, showed 79 relevant infarcts: 46 were small, deep, lacunar infarcts (58%, 95% confidence interval [CI] 47-69%), and 33 were larger cortical infarcts.  The histories and the type of infarct in these 79 patients were compared to see whether lacunar infarcts were preceded by a history of unilateral motor or sensory symptoms without features usually attributed to the cerebral cortex.  The positive predictive value of such lacunar symptoms was 0.74, with a negative predictive value of 0.61.  11 patients had a cortical infarct despite a history of lacunar TIAs, but only one occurred in the left hemisphere and speech was not affected.  Of 527 patients with transient ischaemic attacks without a relevant infarct visible on computed tomography, 335 (64%) had a history suggestive of lacunar ischaemia, whereas in several other studies 20-25% of patients with ischaemic stroke have evidence of lacunar infarcts.  Lacunar TIAs may therefore have a better prognosis than cortical TIAs or may often precede cortical infarcts; alternatively, many cortical infarcts may occur without warning.
The role of conditioning and verbal expectancy in the placebo response.  Both conditioning and expectancy models have been offered in recent years as explanations for the placebo response.  Following our earlier work on conditioning placebo responses in human subjects the current study examined the relative contribution made by conditioning and verbal expectancy.  Group 1 received a Combined Expectancy and Conditioning Manipulation; group 2 received Expectancy Alone; group 3, Conditioning Alone; and group 4 was the control group.  Subjects' responses were compared with and without a placebo cream, using iontophoretic pain stimulation.  The results suggest that conditioning was more powerful than verbal expectancy in creating a placebo response.
Profiles of opioid analgesia in humans after intravenous bolus administration: alfentanil, fentanyl and morphine compared on experimental pain.  This report examines the relationship of plasma drug concentration to analgesic effect following bolus doses of alfentanil, fentanyl and morphine and assesses individual differences in analgesic response among volunteers.  We predicted that the 3 opioids would yield disparate analgesic profiles because their physicochemical and pharmacokinetic characteristics differ.  Ten healthy volunteers received intravenous bolus doses of either alfentanil, fentanyl, morphine or normal saline on different days.  We stimulated their teeth electrically and measured brain evoked potential (EP) and pain report (PR) repeatedly over 2 h to assess analgesic effect.  Concurrently, we drew 18 blood samples to assess opioid plasma concentrations during the test period.  The relationship between opioid plasma concentration and analgesic effect was well defined for alfentanil but ambiguous for morphine.  Fentanyl exhibited a marked hysteresis.  We observed noteworthy individual differences in analgesic response with all 3 drugs but these differences were greatest for morphine and least for alfentanil.  Inter- and intrasubject variability in analgesic response across drugs is related to the physicochemical properties of the drugs tested.
Heart rate changes as an autonomic component of the pain response.  Autonomic variables have been recommended as measures of the affective-motivational component of the pain response in objective algesimetry.  In the present study components of heart rate responses to painful heat stimuli and their relation to stimulus and sensation variables were analyzed.  Twelve healthy subjects served.  Sixty phasic stimuli of varying temperatures above and below pain threshold were delivered through a Marstock thermode in 1 session.  Heart rate, respiration, and subjective stimulus ratings were recorded simultaneously.  Phasic heat stimulation above and below pain threshold induced a tonic increase of the heart rate lasting up to more than 20 sec.  High intensity stimulation generated steeper rises and greater mean increase than low intensity stimulation.  In general, heart rate responses were more closely related to subjective sensation than to stimulus intensity.  However, differential temporal analysis demonstrates that, until about 3 sec after stimulation, the autonomic response is determined solely by stimulus temperature, whereas, after approximately 6 sec, it is related only to subjective judgement.  Accordingly, the heart rate responses reflect both a brief nocifensive reflex induced by the sensory component and, subsequently, a longer-lasting response which seems to be related to affective and/or cognitive evaluation.  This separation of different stages of pain-processing by an autonomic indicator may be useful in clinical algesimetry.
Effects of the calcium antagonist nilvadipine on focal cerebral ischemia in spontaneously hypertensive rats.  We studied the efficacy of preischemic and postischemic systemic treatment with a new calcium antagonist nilvadipine in a permanent focal cerebral ischemia model of spontaneously hypertensive rats.  Rats that underwent microsurgical middle cerebral artery occlusion were blindly assigned to a single intraperitoneal injection of nilvadipine (0.32 mg/kg) or the same amount of polyethylene glycol either 15 minutes before, immediately after, 1 hour after, or 3 hours after occlusion of the left middle cerebral artery.  Neurologic conditions of rats were closely examined, and rats were killed 24 hours later.  Removed brains were sliced coronally, stained with triphenyltetrazolium chloride, and the size of infarct was determined.  Although no neurologic improvements were observed in the treated rats, the area of infarcts was significantly reduced in the groups treated before, immediately after, and 1 hour after occlusion of the middle cerebral artery.  Treatment started 3 hours after occlusion was ineffective.
A single case of Huntington's disease simultaneously occurring with obstructive hydrocephalus.  A case of simultaneously occurring Huntington's disease and obstructive hydrocephalus is presented.  Huntington's and other neurodegenerative diseases have been described with normal-pressure hydrocephalus; however, no such description with obstructive hydrocephalus has been reported.  The obstructive hydrocephalus displays a familial tendency in its presentation.
Why are autism and the fragile-X syndrome associated? Conceptual and methodological issues.  Investigations of the association between autism and the fragile-X syndrome have yielded conflicting results with some studies indicating a strong correlation and others indicating no relation between the disorders.  In this paper, we review the relevant research on this controversy and discuss the conceptual and methodological problems involved in such an inquiry.  We conclude that autism and fragile X are associated and that this relation will prove fruitful in understanding the role of the X chromosome in a variety of behavior disorders and in unraveling various theoretical accounts on the etiology of autism.
Progress in the search for genetic linkage with Tourette syndrome: an exclusion map covering more than 50% of the autosomal genome.  Gilles de la Tourette syndrome is a neuropsychiatric disorder with an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance and reduced penetrance at a single genetic locus.  Several research groups have genetic linkage studies underway to detect the chromosomal location of the gene that predisposes for this disorder.  Strong and clear evidence of linkage has not yet been produced for Tourette syndrome.  This paper presents an overview of the methods and progress of the groups centered at Yale University and Erasmus University in excluding linkage from a large portion of the genome.  Our labs have screened 228 genetic marker loci for linkage with a gene for this disorder in a series of affected families in the United States, Canada, The Netherlands, and Norway.  More than 50% (and perhaps as much as 66%) of the autosomal genome has now been excluded on the assumption that genetic heterogeneity is not an important factor in the Tourette syndrome pedigrees pooled for this summary.
Molecular genetic basis of maple syrup urine disease in a family with two defective alleles for branched chain acyltransferase and localization of the gene to human chromosome 1.  Maple syrup urine disease in humans results from inherited defects in branched chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase, a mitochondrial multienzyme complex.  A variety of genetic changes may produce this phenotype by affecting the function of any of the three complex-specific subunits.  The varied clinical expression observed in patients may be partially explained by the defects in the involved subunit.  Here we report localization of the gene for the branched chain acyltransferase component of the complex to human chromosome 1 and describe a proband who is a compound heterozygote at this locus.  One allele, inherited from the father, produces transcripts with 124 nucleotides deleted from the coding region.  The deletion is not found in the branched chain acyltransferase gene, implying that the deleted transcripts arise by an error in transcript processing.  Cells from the patient's mother contain 50% of the normal amount of mRNA for the subunit, and the proband has inherited this nonexpressing allele from her.  As a result, the proband produces no acyltransferase protein and therefore has greatly impaired complex activity.  A phenotypically normal sibling is shown to be genetically similar to the mother having inherited the mother's nonexpressing allele and the father's normal allele.
Tay-Sachs disease in Moroccan Jews: deletion of a phenylalanine in the alpha-subunit of beta-hexosaminidase.  Tay-Sachs disease is an inherited lysosomal storage disorder caused by defects in the beta-hexosaminidase alpha-subunit gene.  The carrier frequency for Tay-Sachs disease is significantly elevated in both the Ashkenazi Jewish and Moroccan Jewish populations but not in other Jewish groups.  We have found that the mutations underlying Tay-Sachs disease in Ashkenazi and Moroccan Jews are different.  Analysis of a Moroccan Jewish Tay-Sachs patient had revealed an in-frame deletion (delta F) of one of the two adjacent phenylalanine codons that are present at positions 304 and 305 in the alpha-subunit sequence.  The mutation impairs the subunit assembly of beta-hexosaminidase A, resulting in an absence of enzyme activity.  The Moroccan patient was found also to carry, in the other alpha-subunit allele, a different, and as yet unidentified, mutation which causes a deficit of mRNA.  Analysis of obligate carriers from six unrelated Moroccan Jewish families showed that three harbor the delta F mutation, raising the possibility that this defect may be a prevalent mutation in this ethnic group.
Propofol infusion for control of status epilepticus.  Two patients with status epilepticus who were resistant to conventional treatment but responded to propofol infusions are reported.  An electroencephalogram confirmed the seizures and their successful treatment.
32-gauge spinal catheters through 26-gauge needles   Small diameter intrathecal catheters potentially combine the certainty of intrathecal injection and the advantage of repeatability, without the risk of a high incidence of headache after dural puncture.  We report problems placing such catheters.
Paraesthesia with lumbar epidural catheters. A comparison of air and saline in a loss-of-resistance technique.  The epidural space was located in 32 obstetric patients using loss of resistance to air, while in a further 35 saline was used.  The incidence of paraesthesia was 56% in the air group and 57% in the saline group.  There was no significant difference between the groups in terms of other complications or in the quality of analgesia provided.
Telephone use to elicit voice or speech in brain injured subjects.  The initiation of speech is often delayed in the early stages of recovery from a serious brain injury.  We have found a high percentage of patients with both speech and swallowing problems.  This makes bedside assessment of swallowing safety difficult because one cannot listen for the sound of aspirated material on the vocal cords when a patient is at high risk for silent aspiration and is often unable to cooperate with a videofluoroscopic study.  The use of the telephone has been described several times for aphasia treatment, but not to elicit speech or assess swallowing safety early after brain injury.  This study, therefore, recruited subjects who had brain injuries and (1) were referred early for swallowing and other evaluations, (2) were out of coma and able to follow some commands, and (3) did not initiate voice or speak when asked to.  Subjects were asked three questions under two different conditions: face to face and after ringing the telephone from another room.  The results were recorded on videotape and analyzed by another investigator for quantifiable differences.  Six of the seven subjects responded better with the telephone stimulus than without.  This technique may elicit voice or speech early after brain injury in some patients and may be useful in bedside assessment of swallowing safety.  It may also serve as an example of appropriate stimulation of brain injured subjects coming out of coma.
The disabled driver: an unmet challenge.  A survey was undertaken to determine if driving impairment secondary to a disabling injury is addressed in state licensing laws and training programs.  In 35 states drivers submit voluntarily to reevaluation after disabling injuries, but no provision is made for reporting such individuals.  Only 15 states authorize physicians to report impaired drivers, and only seven require such reporting.  Based on a survey of licensing bureaus in the capital or a major city of every state, clerks (who are likely to be the source of information to injured persons) are generally not aware of reporting requirements and supervisors are only slightly better informed.  Of the 100 rehabilitation centers surveyed, only 36 provided on-site training for disabled drivers.  Voluntary submission for reevaluation after head injury does not often occur.  Despite being asked to do so, none of the 35 head injured patients, followed up to two years post-onset, sought reevaluation, although 21 had resumed regular driving.  Two of the 21 were involved in subsequent traffic accidents.  Common guidelines need to be established across states to ensure reevaluation of individuals with disabling conditions, delivery of accurate information concerning licensing, and availability of training programs.
Costs of operating a supported work program for traumatically brain-injured individuals.  This paper presents a preliminary analysis of costs associated with a return-to-work program emphasizing a supported employment approach for persons who had sustained severe traumatic brain injuries.  This analysis spans almost three years.  Results indicated that a mean of 237.8 hours of staff intervention time was required to achieve job stabilization, at a cost of +6896.  Ongoing follow-along and support services averaged 1.64 hours per week at a cost of +47.56.  Over 68% of total staff time and costs were expended in job-site training and advocacy efforts.  Application of these findings to state-level and agency-level policies should be weighed against individual characteristics and needs of clients, program design, and outcomes which clients achieve as a result of services.
Reversible nerve conduction block in patients with polyneuropathy after ultrasound thermotherapy at therapeutic dosage.  This study investigated the effect of ultrasound on nerve conduction in patients with polyneuropathy.  Eight able-bodied controls (Group C) and 16 patients with clinical and physiologic evidence of polyneuropathy were tested.  Eight patients (Group NP) had no aching pain symptoms; eight patients (Group P) had severe aching pain, burning sensation, unpleasant tingling, and/or hyperesthesia in the lower extremities.  For two minutes, therapeutic ultrasound in doses of 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5W/cm2 were applied over the anterior surface of the leg along the pathway of the deep peroneal nerve.  Peroneal nerve conduction studies were performed before, during, and after ultrasound treatment.  The compound muscle action potential (CMAP) was recorded from the extensor digitorum brevis muscle.  Nerve conduction studies on all eight patients in Group P revealed a significant decrease (41.4% and 44% reduced for doses of 1.0W/cm2 and 1.5W/cm2, respectively; p less than .05) in amplitude of CMAP (from baseline to the first negative peak), and an increase (6.4% and 6.7% increased for doses of 1.0W/cm2 and 1.5W/cm2, respectively; p less than .05) in proximal latency one minute after ultrasound application with a dose of 1.0 or 1.5W/cm2, but not with a dose of 0.5W/cm2 (p greater than 0.1).  Changes returned to pretreatment values within five minutes of cessation of ultrasound therapy.  In Groups C and NP, there were no significant changes in amplitudes of CMAP or proximal latency before, during, or after ultrasound therapy at a dose of 0.5, 1.0, or 1.5W/cm2.  It was concluded that ultrasonic therapy with therapeutic dosage may cause a reversible conduction block on patients with painful polyneuropathy.
Goal attainment scaling and outcome measurement in postacute brain injury rehabilitation.  Relationships among two-month and final goal attainment scaling (GAS) scores, preadmission and final Portland Adaptability Inventory (PAI) scores, and work outcome for 16 graduates of a comprehensive, postacute brain injury rehabilitation program were examined.  Final GAS scores were higher for program graduates who obtained the most desirable work outcomes, and preadmission and final PAI scores were lower for the successful program graduates.  Final GAS scores were significantly correlated with other outcome measures.  Preadmission PAI scores predicted work outcome, and two-month GAS scores predicted final GAS scores.  Initial PAI scores distinguished between program successes and failures, but not between program successes and dropouts.  A brief look at one case illustrates the modified application of GAS in postacute brain injury rehabilitation.  Results of this study and case analyses support GAS as a quantifiable, individualized measure that is useful for (1) monitoring patient progress, (2) structuring team conferences, (3) ongoing rehabilitation planning and decision-making, (4) concise, relevant communication to family, referral sources, and funding sources, and (5) overall program evaluation when used in the context of other objective outcome measures.  Although our results support the clinical utility of GAS, further study is recommended to assess the psychometric characteristics of GAS in this application.
Factors predicting satisfactory home care after stroke.  This study prospectively investigated factors predicting optimal poststroke home care.  One hundred and thirty-five first occurrence stroke patients and their primary support persons were evaluated during the initial hospitalization after stroke and again one year poststroke.  Discriminant function analysis was used to identify two groups from the baseline data: home care situations which were rated optimal and those which were not.  Group membership was predicted and validated with 72.6% accuracy.  Patients at risk for less than optimal home care had caregivers who were (1) more likely to be depressed, (2) less likely to be married to the patient, (3) below average in knowledge about stroke care, and (4) reporting more family dysfunction.  Our findings suggest that caregiver-related problems can have a collective effect on rehabilitation outcome and that treatment should reduce caregiver depression, minimize family dysfunction, and increase the family's knowledge about stroke care.
Visual illusions in a patient with lateral medullary syndrome.  The disturbance of visual perception associated with nystagmus is a rare phenomenon.  This is a case of a 61-year-old woman who developed progressive right hemisensory deficit, left facial sensory deficit, vertigo, staggering to the left, left ptosis, vertical diplopia, and ataxia of the left upper extremity.  She had rotatory nystagmus in primary position, which increased in amplitude with left gaze.  The above signs and symptoms were consistent with lateral medullary syndrome.  During her rehabilitation, the patient complained of visual disturbances typical of oscillopsia.  These disturbances, or illusions, are compensatory mechanisms for nystagmus and its resultant retinal error.  The purpose of this case presentation was to study the pathophysiology underlying oscillopsia in patients with nystagmus and to stimulate awareness of such visual disturbances in stroke patients.
Higher incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome in oophorectomized women.  To determine whether the hormonal changes of the menopause are related to the onset of carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS), 53 healthy women, younger than 44 years, and subjected to bilateral oophorectomy between 1 and 4 years before the study, were evaluated.  Seventy healthy menstruating women matched for age were used as controls.  In those complaining of symptoms and presenting signs suggestive of CTS, sensory and motor nerve conduction studies were done.  In the oophorectomized group, 17 of 53 (32%) had clinical CTS, while only seven of 70 of the control group (10%) did so (relative risk for the oophorectomized group = 4.25; 95% confidence intervals 1.47 and 12.61).  The nerve conduction studies were abnormal in 14 of 16 oophorectomized women (87.5%), and in only one of seven of the control group (14.2%; P less than 0.002).  Symptoms tended to be milder in the controls.  Symptoms developed in the first year after oophorectomy in 14 of the 17 women with CTS.  This suggests that women develop CTS after oophorectomy more frequently than controls.
Advances in the treatment of complex cerebrovascular disorders by interventional neurovascular techniques.  Treatment of complex cerebrovascular disorders, including intracranial aneurysms, carotid cavernous sinus fistulas, vertebral fistulas, arteriovenous malformations, atherosclerosis of brachiocephalic vessels, and arterial vasospasm, is being performed in selected cases by interventional neurovascular techniques.  Recent advances in microballoon technology, permanent solidifying polymers, newer embolic agents, high-resolution digital subtraction angiography with road-mapping technique, and steerable micro-guide wires and catheters have greatly improved access in the distal intracranial circulation and markedly reduced the morbidity associated with these procedures.  Interventional neuroradiology is emerging as an important adjunct to neurosurgery for selected cerebrovascular disorders.
Antiepileptic drugs, cognitive function, and behavior in children: evidence from recent studies.  The effects of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) on cognitive function and behavior in children are reviewed on the basis of published studies.  Individual AEDs have been shown to differ--the deleterious effects of phenytoin generally contrasting with the relatively minimal effects of valproate and carbamazepine.  Some of the differences between results may be attributed to the psychological tests used and to age differences.  However, there appears to be a dissociation between AEDs that affect higher cognitive function, e.g., phenytoin, and those mainly affecting motor function, e.g., carbamazepine, which appears to increase speed of performance, AEDs should be prescribed with care in children with epilepsy, taking account of their differing effects on cognitive function and behavior.
Computerized neuropsychological assessment of cognitive functioning in children with epilepsy.  The value of a range of computer-aided tests in the neuropsychological assessment was investigated in 94-177 children with epilepsy, aged 8-18 years, compared with 68-161 controls in the same age group.  Children from the age of 8 years could cope with rather complex tests in a wide range of functions: reaction time measurements, motor speed, information processing, and memory.  The speed of performance tended to increase with age in both groups, with differences in information processing becoming apparent from the age of 12 years.  The precise control of stimulus and response required to define the mainly minor differences between the epilepsy and control groups can only be fulfilled by computerized testing, which should undergo further refinement including voice and language recognition, followed by artificial intelligence.
Electroencephalographic parameters in assessing the cognitive function of children with epilepsy.  Many biological and psychological possibilities have to be considered when attempting to explain cognitive dysfunction in the individual child with epilepsy.  Electroencephalographic (EEG) information, which may be particularly relevant in some children, has mainly been studied in relation to the possible direct effects of seizure discharges on learning and behavior.  Such discharges can be divided into transient, brief or prolonged.  Prolonged seizure discharges includes nonconvulsive status epilepticus during wakefulness and status epilepticus during slow-wave sleep.  In addition to the influence of seizure discharges, preliminary findings suggest that some children with epilepsy might have a subtle disorder of arousal mechanisms in sleep, possibly associated with impaired daytime performance.
Discontinuation of antiepileptic drugs in children who have outgrown epilepsy: effects on cognitive function.  Cognitive function is frequently impaired in children with epilepsy, compared with age-matched controls.  It can be hard to evaluate the significance of various contributory factors.  The effects of antiepileptic drugs may be studied in children who have outgrown their epilepsy but are still being treated.  A multicenter study to assess various aspects of cognitive function in children with different forms of epilepsy, both during and after treatment with antiepileptic drugs, is currently under way.  Definitive results are not yet available; interim analysis of the findings suggests that short-term memory is decreased in all subgroups of children being treated for epilepsy, compared to controls.
MRI, CT, SPECT, PET: their use in diagnosing dementia.  The differential diagnosis of the dementia syndrome may pose a difficult clinical problem, since the most common dementia, Alzheimer's disease (AD), is marked by normal laboratory tests.  Neuroimaging has played an important role in evaluating the demented patient, and its uses are growing.  Computed tomography (CT) is useful for excluding reversible and treatable causes of dementia, such as subdural hematoma and tumor.  More recently, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has improved our ability to diagnose vascular disease and may show the presence of cerebral infarcts and white matter disease not visible on CT.  Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography (PET), techniques that visualize such cerebral functions as glucose metabolism and blood flow, may provide positive evidence supportive of the diagnosis of AD.
Intravenous administration of phosphorylated acid alpha-glucosidase leads to uptake of enzyme in heart and skeletal muscle of mice.  The lysosomal storage disorder glycogenosis type II is caused by acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency.  In this study we have investigated the possible applicability of mannose 6-phosphate receptor-mediated enzyme replacement therapy to correct the enzyme deficiency in the most affected tissues.  Bovine testes acid alpha-glucosidase containing phosphorylated mannose residues was intravenously administered to mice and found to be taken up by heart (70% increase of activity) and skeletal muscle (43% increase); the major target organs.  The uptake of nonphosphorylated human placenta acid alpha-glucosidase by heart and skeletal muscle appeared to be significantly less efficient, whereas uptake of dephosphorylated bovine testes enzyme was not detectable.  The phosphorylated bovine testes acid alpha-glucosidase remained present in mouse skeletal muscle up to 9-15 d after administration, with a half-life of 2-4 d.  Besides being measured in skeletal muscle and heart, uptake of phosphorylated bovine testes and nonphosphorylated human placenta acid alpha-glucosidase was measured in several other organs, but not in brain.  The increase of acid alpha-glucosidase activity was highest in liver and spleen.  We concluded that application of mannose 6-phosphate receptor-mediated enzyme replacement therapy may offer new perspectives for treatment of glycogenesis type II.
The timed "Up & Go": a test of basic functional mobility for frail elderly persons.  This study evaluated a modified, timed version of the "Get-Up and Go" Test (Mathias et al, 1986) in 60 patients referred to a Geriatric Day Hospital (mean age 79.5 years).  The patient is observed and timed while he rises from an arm chair, walks 3 meters, turns, walks back, and sits down again.  The results indicate that the time score is (1) reliable (inter-rater and intra-rater); (2) correlates well with log-transformed scores on the Berg Balance Scale (r = -0.81), gait speed (r = -0.61) and Barthel Index of ADL (r = -0.78); and (3) appears to predict the patient's ability to go outside alone safely.  These data suggest that the timed "Up & Go" test is a reliable and valid test for quantifying functional mobility that may also be useful in following clinical change over time.  The test is quick, requires no special equipment or training, and is easily included as part of the routine medical examination.
Mini-Mental State exam scores vary with education in blacks and whites.  Previous studies have suggested that education and race may affect performance on standardized mental status tests.  In order to more clearly define these relationships, a prospective longitudinal study was devised to answer two questions: (1) whether race or level of education affects scores on the Mini-Mental State (MMS) exam in non-demented people and (2) what numerical cutpoints maximize the sensitivity and specificity of utilizing the MMS to help diagnose dementia in blacks of varying educational attainment.  A total of 100 white and 258 black individuals, recruited from two city hospital primary care geriatric clinics, were evaluated and subsequently followed longitudinally over a 2 1/2 year period in order to assess accurately the presence or absence of dementia.  In the non-demented, total MMS scores and performance on each item of the MMS were analyzed, revealing that people with an 8th grade or less education consistently had significantly (P less than .01) worse results than the better educated (9th grade or better) on borough, attention items, recall of table and dog, copying, sentence writing, phrase repeating, and total score.  Furthermore, a total of 25% of the lower education group had an MMS score in the 18-23 range, traditionally thought to suggest dementia.  There were no consistently significant differences between blacks and whites of equal education.  In the better educated groups, using a score of 23 or less to define dementia maximizes the sensitivity and specificity of using the MMS in this diagnosis at 93% and 100%, respectively.  In the lower education group, using 17 or less to define dementia maximizes sensitivity and specificity at 81% and 100%, respectively.
Physician practices in the diagnosis of dementing disorders.  Because there are both treatable and untreatable causes of dementia, the physician's ability to conduct (or refer a patient for) a differential diagnosis could have a profound effect on health outcomes for patients and on health care costs.  This study was undertaken to assess physician practices with regard to the diagnosis of dementing disorders.  Data from 53 physicians (a response rate of 48%) in several specialties were obtained from a self-administered mail questionnaire.  Results indicate that the majority of physicians provided history taking, physical examination, and neurological examination.  Physicians were more likely to refer patients for psychiatric and neuropsychological examinations than to provide these services themselves.  The results also point to deficiencies in two key areas: the use of formal, published diagnostic criteria, and the use of mental status and cognitive function tests.  Over 75% of physicians surveyed did not use either DSM-III or NINCDS-ADRDA diagnostic criteria, and 42% of physicians did not provide any mental status tests themselves.  The need for continuing education to close knowledge gaps is emphasized.
Localization of technetium-99m-glucarate in zones of acute cerebral injury.  The potential structural similarity of technetium-99m-labeled glucaric acid (99mTc-glucarate) to that of fructose suggests that this agent may enter cells by a sugar transport system.  Studies with LLC-PK1 cells demonstrated inhibition of 99mTc-glucarate uptake by fructose, confirming this potential relationship.  Since anaerobic metabolism can use either glucose or fructose, we hypothesized that 99mTc-glucarate may concentrate in areas of acute ischemic injury.  To test this hypothesis, 63 adult rats with middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion followed by reperfusion were injected with 99mTc-glucarate and in vivo and ex vivo images were acquired.  Seven animals were also studied with 18FDG and high resolution PET imaging.  The radionuclide images were compared to the results of triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining and conventional histopathology.  Thirty-five rats had significant accumulation of 99mTc-glucarate and no TTC staining (indicating infarction) in the involved hemisphere.  Of the remaining 28 rats with TTC staining (suggesting viability) of the involved hemisphere, 16 (57%) had 99mTc-glucarate accumulation.  In the seven rats that were studied with both 99mTc-glucarate and 18FDG, 99mTc-glucarate accumulated at the center of the occluded MCA territory while 18FDG activity was decreased in this region.  These results suggest that 99mTc-glucarate is a sensitive marker of acute severe cerebral injury, but its mechanism of localization is probably different from that of 18FDG.
Meralgia paresthetica after coronary bypass surgery.  Meralgia paresthetica is a neurologic disorder characterized by localized paresthesia and numbness on the anterolateral aspect of the thigh and involving the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve.  It involves no motor deficits.  Meralgia paresthetica, which may result from a variety of causes, has been observed as a rare complication in heart operations.  Its cause when associated with such operations is uncertain but may be prolonged relaxed positioning on the operating table and recovery room stretcher.  Another possible cause of meralgia paresthetica after heart operations is the "frog-leg" position of the legs during vein harvesting.  Patients with this condition should be advised of its untreatable, but benign and self-limiting, nature.
Neurofibromatosis type 2: report of a family and review of current evaluation and treatment.  Significant advances during the past decade have greatly improved our understanding of neurofibromatosis type 2, a genetic disease which results in bilateral acoustic neuromas.  The emergence of gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging has allowed early detection of minute intracanalicular eighth-nerve tumors, less than 1 cm in diameter.  Recombinant DNA studies have clarified the genetics that underlie neurofibromatosis type 2 and separate it from a variety of related conditions, such as von Recklinghausen's neurofibromatosis.  Early diagnosis and surgical removal of these tumors may offer the only hope of preserving hearing and facial nerve function.  A report of the evaluation and treatment of a family with multiple affected individuals will exemplify these conclusions.
Reversible myeloneuropathy of nitrous oxide abuse: serial electrophysiological studies.  Detailed electrophysiological studies were performed in 4 patients with myeloneuropathy induced by abuse of nitrous oxide for 1 to 4 years.  All presented with paresthesias, weakness, and Lhermitte's phenomena, and exhibited signs of sensorimotor polyneuropathy, ataxia, and arreflexia.  Two had subnormal serum vitamin B12 levels.  Baseline electrophysiologic testing revealed reduced motor unit potentials, prolonged F wave latencies, absent H reflexes, denervation potentials, and delays in motor and sensory conduction.  Three had peripheral and nuchal delay after median nerve stimulation.  All were reevaluated after 3 to 12 months' abstinence and treatment with vitamin B12, and all showed substantial clinical improvement.  Parallel improvement in electrophysiologic findings occurred, but residual minor conduction delays, loss of H reflexes, electromyographic evidence of denervation, or abnormalities of posterior tibial SEP were noted.  These findings confirm the reversibility of myeloneuropathy of nitrous oxide abuse and describe the profile of electrophysiologic recovery in subjects who abstain from further neurotoxic exposure.
Nerve-muscle involvement in a large family with mitochondrial cytopathy: electrophysiological studies.  Thirteen patients with mitochondrial cytopathy were investigated.  They represent different generations, ages, stages, and severities of the disease.  All were assumed to have the same metabolic defect.  The disease is a multisystem disorder with a metabolic defect located at complex 1 in the respiratory chain.  Clinically, the disorder gives symptoms such as hearing loss, retinal pigmental degeneration, ataxia, cardiomyopathy, muscular fatiguability and neuropathy.  The patients were investigated with nerve conduction studies, concentric needle EMG, SFEMG, and macro EMG examinations.  Neurophysiologic studies revealed signs of myopathy in both the younger members and in those with slight muscular symptoms.  In the more advanced stages, neuropathic changes of the axonal type were seen as well.  Macro EMG was interpreted as indicating muscle fiber membrane abnormalities in the early stages.  Single fiber EMG studies indicate that this metabolic defect does not disturb neuromuscular transmission.
Diagnostic and prognostic value of electrophysiologic tests in meralgia paresthetica.  Electrophysiologic diagnosis of unilateral meralgia paresthetica is usually assessed by side-to-side comparison of SNAP amplitudes, SNCVs, and SEP latencies following stimulation of lateral femoral cutaneous nerves.  To determine the relevance for diagnosis of these tests and side-to-side comparison, the results were compared in patients with unilateral meralgia paresthetica and normal subjects.  The long-term outcome was also considered, in order to determine whether electrophysiologic findings contribute to the prognosis.  In our study, SNAP amplitude comparison was found to be more useful for diagnosis than SNCV and SEP latency comparisons.  However the value of the SNAP amplitude on the affected side, just as the results of the other tests, was not found to be predictive of the outcome.  Also the results of the tests depend on the methods used and on the nerve's route.
Effects of short spaceflights on mechanical characteristics of rat muscles.  The aim of this study was to investigate the contractile protein characteristics after 5-day (Cosmos 1514) and 7-day (Cosmos 1667) spaceflights.  The experiments were performed on skinned fibers from the soleus, gastrocnemius lateralis, and plantaris muscles isolated from Wistar rats.  A reduction in fiber diameter might explain the decrease in the maximal tension in the soleus, whereas this tension was unaltered in the gastrocnemius and the plantaris.  Moreover the calcium sensitivity of the myofilament appeared modified in the soleus and in the gastrocnemius: The tension/pCa relationships were shifted toward higher calcium concentrations, indicating a decrease in the apparent calcium binding constant of the troponin C.  The tension/pCa relationship appeared unaltered in the plantaris after spaceflight.  Finally, the studies of the time to reach a steady tension indicated an increase in the rate of force development in the soleus and, on the contrary, a slowing down in the plantaris.  No change in the gastrocnemius was found.  The results were analyzed with references to the different muscle functions in disuse atrophy.
Patient perception of tics and other movement disorders.  To determine the subjective perception patients have of abnormal movements, 170 patients with various hyperkinesias were interviewed with questions directed at the "voluntary" or intentional versus "involuntary" aspects of their symptoms.  One hundred and two of 110 patients with non-tic disorders thought that the abnormal movements were entirely involuntary.  Forty-one of 60 tic disorder patients stated that all their motor and phonic tics were intentionally produced.  Fifteen others had both voluntary and involuntary components, usually with the former predominating.  A "voluntary" response could be used to predict the correct diagnostic category (tic versus non-tic) in 8 of 9 patients for whom the referral category was incorrect.  These results suggest that a large proportion of the motor and phonic symptoms experienced by tic patients are irresistibly but purposefully executed, more akin to compulsions than to the other "involuntary" hyperkinesias with which they are commonly discussed.
Symptoms and disease associations in idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri): a case-control study.  To identify the symptoms and coexisting medical conditions associated with idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH), we administered an 83-item questionnaire at the time of diagnosis to 50 IIH patients and 100 aged-matched controls.  Ninety percent of the IIH patients were women; the mean age was 33.  Obesity and recent weight gain were much more common among patients than controls.  Symptoms most commonly reported by IIH patients were headache (94%), transient visual obscurations (TVO) (68%), and intracranial noises (ICN) (58%).  Daily occurrence of these symptoms was much more common among patients than controls.  Controls also reported these and other IIH symptoms, but at lower frequencies.  Several conditions previously associated with IIH were no more common in patients than controls including iron deficiency anemia, thyroid disease, pregnancy, antibiotic intake, and use of oral contraceptives.  We conclude that previous studies of IIH, mostly uncontrolled and retrospective, have underestimated the frequency of symptoms in IIH patients and reported chance and spurious associations with common medical conditions and medications.  The profile of a young obese woman with headaches and either TVO or ICN should alert the clinician to the diagnosis of IIH, especially when the symptoms occur daily.
Infarction in the anterior rostral cerebellum (the territory of the lateral branch of the superior cerebellar artery).  We report 9 patients with an isolated infarct of the anterior part of the rostral cerebellum, ie, the territory of the lateral branch of the superior cerebellar artery.  Clinicoanatomic correlations are based on CT, MRI, or both in 8 patients and on pathologic data in the ninth.  The main clinical features were ipsilateral dysmetria and axial lateropulsion, dysarthria, and unsteadiness.  In 1 patient, the clinical presentation mimicked a lacunar stroke (dysarthria and clumsy hand syndrome).  There were no edematous cerebellar infarcts with signs of brainstem compression, and all patients spontaneously improved without significant sequellae.  Angiography in 2 patients and pathologic examination of arteries in 1 patient disclosed no occlusion in the vertebrobasilar system.  Six patients had a cardiac source of emboli.  In conclusion, infarcts of the anterior part of the rostral cerebellum can be regarded as a benign condition in which there is, frequently, a cardiac source of emboli.
Comparison of functional and structural brain disturbances in Wilson's disease.  We assessed the functional and structural brain disturbances in Wilson's disease (WD) by evoked potentials (EPs) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  All the 25 neurologically symptomatic and 44% of the 16 asymptomatic patients, assessed by both EPs (n = 48) and imaging (n = 41), had at least 1 abnormality of either prolonged EP conduction times, imaging-outlined presence of cerebral lesions, or brain atrophy.  Our findings indicate that EPs and MRI are sensitive techniques for the evaluation of brain involvement in WD.
Interictal spiking during wakefulness and sleep and the localization of foci in temporal lobe epilepsy.  We examined variations in interictal spiking during sleep and wakefulness to assess differences in reliability for localizing epileptic foci.  Forty patients were studied prospectively.  Spikes were assessed for rates, field, and appearance of new foci.  Final localization was determined by surgery, electrocorticography, and seizure onset.  Comparison of interictal EEG foci with final localization was made.  In 39 patients, slow-wave sleep activated spiking compared with wakefulness.  Most patients showed maximal spiking in sleep stages 3 or 4.  Restriction of field in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and wakefulness, and extension of field in slow-wave sleep occurred.  New foci appeared in non-rapid eye movement sleep in 53% of patients.  Similar but not identical spiking rates, foci, and field distributions were seen in wakefulness and REM sleep.  All REM foci were unilateral.  Our findings suggest that localization of the primary epileptogenic area is more reliable in REM sleep than in wakefulness, and in wakefulness more than in slow-wave sleep.
Phenytoin toxicity due to interaction with clobazam.  The benzodiazepine antiepileptic drug clobazam can be added to existing AED treatment, usually without clinical toxicity.  We report 3 patients in whom the addition of clobazam led within several weeks to clinically obvious phenytoin (PHT) intoxication in patients who had been taking maximum tolerable PHT doses.  Symptoms and high PHT levels resolved with lowering the PHT dose.  Clobazam and norclobazam levels were not elevated.  This interaction is probably related to interference with hepatic degradation of PHT.  Clinicians should be aware of possible PHT intoxication in patients starting clobazam.
Prediction of free phenytoin levels based on [total phenytoin]/[albumin] ratios. Potential errors with hypoalbuminemia.  Therapeutic monitoring of the pharmacologically active (free drug) fraction of protein-bound medications (e.g., phenytoin) represents a major diagnostic challenge in clinical and laboratory medicine.  While free drug levels may be beneficial in many clinical situations, current methods for predicting free phenytoin concentrations are unreliable and not recommended for general use.  The authors have demonstrated a linear relationship (r2 = 0.98) between serum levels of total and bound phenytoin in 56 patients with seizure disorders.  No significant correlations were observed when total phenytoin and albumin levels were compared independently to measured concentrations of free phenytoin or percent free phenytoin.  A good correlation (r2 = 0.89) existed between free phenytoin levels and [total phenytoin]/[albumin] ratios in patients with normal or elevated albumin levels, but significantly weaker correlations were found in patients with hypoalbuminemia.  Thus, [total phenytoin]/[albumin] ratios may have clinical value in predicting free phenytoin levels in uncomplicated patients without hypoalbuminemia.
A critical appraisal of mitogen-induced lymphocyte proliferation in depressed patients.  OBJECTIVE: The authors' goal was to evaluate the utility of mitogen-induced lymphocyte proliferation assays in clinical research in psychoimmunology.  METHOD: They examined 23 depressed patients and 23 matched comparison subjects with this assay.  There were no significant differences between these groups.  They then combined the results of this study with the results of their previous study of 20 depressed patients and 20 comparison subjects to examine possible determinants of lymphocyte proliferation in depression.  RESULTS: Depressed patients with lower proliferative responses than their matched comparison subjects had lower depression subscale, anergia subscale, and total scores on the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale than did patients with higher proliferative responses than their matched comparison subjects.  This finding was unexpected and unexplained.  Depressed patients with lower proliferative responses than their matched comparison subjects also had fewer obsessions and compulsions and less psychomotor agitation according to the Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia interview than did patients with higher proliferative responses than their matched comparison subjects.  Stepwise discriminant analysis and cluster analysis contributed little further understanding of the determinants of in vitro lymphocyte proliferation of cells from depressed patients.  CONCLUSIONS: Longitudinal studies using multiple serial determinations of mitogen-induced lymphocyte proliferation are the minimal design needed to make this assay useful in further evaluating any immune system changes in depression.
Depressive symptoms following stroke.  OBJECTIVE: The primary purpose of this study was to assess the relation of lesion location to mood and vegetative disturbance following stroke.  METHOD: Fifty-two inpatients and outpatients who had had single, unilateral strokes were included.  Patients with past CNS or psychiatric disorders were excluded.  A modified Visual Analogue Dysphoria Scale was used to allow the inclusion of all but the most impaired aphasic patients.  Sleep and eating disturbances were measured by using both self-report and nursing assessments.  Location of lesions was determined by CT scan and classified according to three dimensions: right-left, dorsal-ventral, and frontal-nonfrontal.  RESULTS: On measures of dysphoric mood and sleep disturbance, results indicated significant three-way interactions among the three lesion dimensions.  No differences were found with regard to eating disturbance.  Greater dysphoria and sleep disturbance were found in subjects with left parietal/occipital, left inferior frontal, right superior frontal, and right temporal lesions than in subjects with lesions in other locations.  Depressive symptoms were not associated with functional impairment as measured by activities of daily living, motor strength, or severity of aphasia.  CONCLUSIONS: These results support the hypothesis that lesion location is a valid and significant factor in the mixture of influences which may result in a dysphoric mood state following stroke.  The relation between the site of the lesion and subsequent depressive symptoms, however, may be more complex than has been reported previously.
The nature and course of olfactory deficits in Alzheimer's disease.  OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine the specific nature and course of olfactory deficits in Alzheimer's disease.  Previous studies had noted impaired odor identification, but there was no unanimity about the presence of odor detection deficits.  METHOD: Odor identification was tested in 55 patients with Alzheimer's disease and 57 elderly control subjects by using the University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test.  Odor detection was assessed in 46 subjects with Alzheimer's disease and 40 control subjects by using a forced-choice threshold test with geraniol as the odorant.  RESULTS: Significant deficits in olfactory identification were present in subjects who were in the earliest stages of cognitive impairment, and these deficits increased as Alzheimer's disease progressed.  There was some overlap in individual smell identification test scores between cognitively impaired patients and normal elderly subjects.  On the other hand, odor detection deficits did not appear until Alzheimer's disease was relatively advanced.  Smell identification test scores were correlated with Mini-Mental State scores, but geraniol detection was not.  CONCLUSIONS: Odor identification is impaired early in Alzheimer's disease and may be more influenced by cognitive status than is acuity of odor detection, which is not altered until later in the disorder.  The pattern of hyposmia in Alzheimer's disease suggests that the disorder may not "begin in the nose," as has been theorized previously.  Further refinement of olfactory testing may be useful in the diagnostic evaluation of early dementia.
Nonfearful panic disorder in neurology patients validated by lactate challenge.  OBJECTIVE: Nonfearful panic disorder meets the DSM-III-R criteria for panic disorder but is not associated with subjective fear and anxiety.  The authors determined its prevalence in a group of neurology patients and assessed its diagnostic validity as a panic disorder subtype by evaluating the response of the patients with nonfearful panic disorder to sodium lactate and antipanic pharmacotherapy.  METHOD: The subjects were all neurology patients referred over 1 year to a university hospital's psychiatric consultation service because of negative medical workups for their symptoms (N = 48).  Patients who met the DSM-III-R criteria for panic disorder but did not report subjective anxiety or fear during panic episodes were diagnosed as having nonfearful panic disorder.  Afterward, each of those patients received a sodium lactate infusion and, 5 hours later, a sodium chloride infusion.  They were then treated with antipanic medication and followed for at least 6 months.  RESULTS: Of the 48 neurology patients referred for psychiatric evaluation, 11 (23%) met the criteria for panic disorder, and all 11 met the criteria for nonfearful panic disorder.  All 11 responded positively to lactate but not to placebo, and they each experienced an at least 75% reduction in symptoms during the 6-month follow-up period.  Detailed case reports of three of these patients are presented.  CONCLUSIONS: These findings support the construct and predictive diagnostic validity of nonfearful panic disorder as a subtype of panic disorder and suggest that a lack of attention to this group leads to both the underestimation of the prevalence of panic disorder and to the withholding of potentially successful treatments for this group.
Organ procurement in patients with fatal head injuries. The fate of the potential donor.  A 46-month, retrospective review of all victims of fatal head injury at a level 1 trauma center was undertaken to estimate donor organ availability, determine causes of procurement failure, and analyze the functional results of organs transplanted from this group of donors.  Causes of procurement failure in 126 patients who died principally from their head injuries included failure of initial resuscitation (14%), ineligibility (28%), failure of physiologic support (14%), and denial of consent (20%).  Of 73 eligible donors, 29 (41%) were able to donate one or more vascular organs (heart, liver, kidney).  In only one instance was an eligible donor not appropriately identified as such.  Failure of physiologic support to prevent early death (25%), and denial of consent (34%) were found to be the two major, potentially remediable causes of procurement failure in this series.  Based on this data, an estimated 29 patients/million population/year will survive initially and meet all eligibility requirements for organ donation.  Data on 47 kidneys transplanted from the donor group demonstrated a 77% overall graft survival rate at a follow-up period averaging 23 months.  Prolonged donor hypotension, but not the use of high-dose vasopressors, adversely affected allograft survival.  The current limitations of organ procurement in victims of fatal head injury stem from a limited ability to maintain cardiopulmonary function long enough for the procurement process to be completed and a high overall rate (46%) of denial of consent for organ harvest by next of kin.
P300 brain activity in seizure patients preceding temporal lobectomy.  Event-related potentials were recorded over occipital and parietal scalp from 20 patients suffering from intractable partial complex seizures prior to undergoing a temporal lobectomy.  Subjects were presented with language and nonlanguage visual stimuli using a divided-field, "odd-ball" paradigm.  Although behavioral performance (button-press accuracy, reaction time, and running counts) was comparable across all groups (although accuracy was worse for those in the left temporal group), patients showed tremendous variability in both the amplitude and latency of the P300 response.  Particularly notable was the observation that more slow wave activity was present among the patients than among the control subjects, and those scheduled for a left temporal resection evinced more amplitude reduction than those scheduled for a right temporal resection.  In addition, a number of patients appeared not to show a P300 response at all.  These results are discussed in the context of the utility of using noninvasive event-related potential measures to examine both memory impairment and the integrity of the neural structures that mediate memory functioning in certain patient populations.
Age at onset of Alzheimer's disease. Relation to language dysfunction.  A later age at onset of Alzheimer's disease (AD) was found to be related to diminished language performance in 86 patients with probable AD.  A hierarchical linear model was constructed to assess effects of age at onset and disease duration on the performance of patients with AD on four language tasks (naming, reading, auditory comprehension, and writing to dictation) after controlling for disease severity.  Results of univariate analysis, in which the dependent variable was the averaged language task performances, revealed a significant effect for age at onset of AD, but not for disease duration.  To assess the possibility that the relationship between the age at onset of AD and language performance reflects effects of normal aging, the language tasks were given to 33 normal subjects of similar ages who scored perfectly on dementia severity measures.  A convincing relationship was not found between test score and age.
The distribution of cerebral muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in vivo in patients with dementia. A controlled study with 123IQNB and single photon emission computed tomography.  A high-affinity muscarinic receptor antagonist, 123IQNB (3-quinuclidinyl-4-iodobenzilate labeled with iodine 123), was used with single photon emission computed tomography to image muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in 14 patients with dementia and in 11 healthy controls.  High-resolution single photon emission computed tomographic scanning was performed 21 hours after the intravenous administration of approximately 5 mCi of IQNB.  In normal subjects, the images of retained ligand showed a consistent regional pattern that correlated with postmortem studies of the relative distribution of muscarinic receptors in the normal human brain, having high radioactivity counts in the basal ganglia, occipital cortex, and insular cortex, low counts in the thalamus, and virtually no counts in the cerebellum.  Eight of 12 patients with a clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease had obvious focal cortical defects in either frontal or posterior temporal cortex.  Both patients with a clinical diagnosis of Pick's disease had obvious frontal and anterior temporal defects.  A region of interest statistical analysis of relative regional activity revealed a significant reduction bilaterally in the posterior temporal cortex of the patients with Alzheimer's disease compared with controls.  This study demonstrates the practicability of acetylcholine receptor imaging with 123IQNB and single photon emission computed tomography.  The data suggest that focal abnormalities in muscarinic binding in vivo may characterize some patients with Alzheimer's disease and Pick's disease, but further studies are needed to address questions about partial volume artifacts and receptor quantification.
Widespread functional effects of discrete thalamic infarction.  In order to investigate functional effects of various thalamic structures on metabolism in remote, morphologically intact cerebral regions, we used positron emission tomography of (18F)-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose to study regional cerebral metabolic rates of glucose (rCMRGlu) in 11 patients with chronic unilateral or bilateral infarcts strictly confined to the thalamus.  Patients were grouped according to computed tomographic scans showing anterior (three), medial (four), or posterior (four) lesions.  Compared with a matched group of 11 healthy subjects (hemispheric CMRGlu 35.2 +/- 3.49 mumol/100 g per minute), glucose metabolism was significantly lower in the hemisphere ipsilateral to the infarction (31.2 +/- 2.97 mumol/100 g per minute).  Patients with bilateral infarcts had lower hemispheric CMRGlu (29.9 +/- 2.74 mumol/100 g per minute) than those with unilateral lesions (32.2 +/- 2.97 mumol/100 g per minute).  Depending on infarct location within the thalamus, there was differential depression of rCMRGlu, with the largest effects on frontal and occipital areas in medial infarctions.  Except for ipsilateral thalamic deactivation, metabolic patterns with anterior thalamic infarcts were close to normal, while posterior infarcts mostly depressed rCMRGlu in the visual and in the inferior limbic cortex.  Cerebellar metabolic rates were within normal limits in most cases.  These patterns of regional cerebral deactivation may be related to categories of thalamic projections--intrathalamic, to limbic system and basal ganglia, diffuse to most cortical areas, and specific to defined neocortical areas.  Even small brain lesions may have widespread functional sequelae, potentially demonstrable by positron emission tomography.
The effect of sleep on the dyskinetic movements of Parkinson's disease, Gilles de la Tourette syndrome, Huntington's disease, and torsion dystonia.  The effect of sleep on the involuntary movements or dyskinesias in Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, primary and secondary torsion dystonia, and Gilles de la Tourette syndrome was studied in a total of 52 patients and 10 normal subjects using video electroencephalographic telemetry.  Movements typical of the wake pattern were seen occasionally during unequivocal sleep in all but two completed studies, and in each condition reappeared under similar circumstances.  The movements were most likely to occur after awakenings or lightenings of sleep, or in stage one sleep.  The movements were very rare during the deeper phases of sleep.  Those movements that occurred during sleep without awakenings were usually preceded by arousal phenomena and, rarely, by sleep spindles or slow waves.  The control group showed normal "semipurposeful" movements under the same conditions during sleep.  The rare appearance of the different dyskinesias and normal movements under similar circumstances during sleep could be a result of common effects on the generator systems or changes in the excitability of the final common motor pathway.
Posttraumatic torticollis.  We report six cases of torticollis precipitated by neck trauma.  The dystonia began 1 to 4 days after the trauma and differed clinically from idiopathic torticollis by marked limitation of range of motion, lack of improvement after sleep ("honeymoon period"), and absence of geste antagonistique.  Worsening with action was not present; nor was there improvement with support as seen with idiopathic torticollis.  Onset of pain immediately after the trauma and marked spasms of the paracervical muscles were other predominant features.  Anticholinergic therapy was without benefit; however, some improvement occurred with botulinum toxin injection.  It is concluded that torticollis can be caused by peripheral trauma and that it has unique clinical characteristics.
An early description of slowly progressive aphasia.  Slowly progressive aphasia without generalized dementia has become an important issue of present-day neuropsychological research.  Historically, credit for the first description is usually given to Pick.  Another German-speaking author who has published a vivid description of a pertinent cases is Pick's contemporary, Max Rosenfeld.  This author has also observed a patient with slowly progressive spatial disorientation and visual recognition deficit, and he has discussed these patients in a remarkably modern way in the context of partial atrophy of the brain.
Frontal impairment and hypoperfusion in neuroacanthocytosis.  Cerebral blood flow tomography, by xenon 133 inhalation or HMPAO (99mTc-d, l-hexamethyl-propylene amine oxime) technetium Tc 99m injection, revealed a severe hypoperfusion in both frontal lobes of a 40-year-old woman with confirmed neuroacanthocytosis.  This finding occurred in conjunction with neuropsychological deficits consistent with selective frontal lobe dysfunction.  This observation is the first documentation of this type of dementia in neuroacanthocytosis.
Comparison of motor response to apomorphine and levodopa in Parkinson's disease.  The magnitude and pattern of motor responses to single doses of subcutaneous apomorphine and oral levodopa were compared in 14 patients with Parkinson's disease.  Although apomorphine produced much shorter motor responses than levodopa, the quality of response to the two drugs was virtually indistinguishable.  These clinical observations support the notion that integrity of striatal post-synaptic dopamine receptors is a key determinant of responsiveness to dopaminergic treatment in Parkinson's disease.
Evaluation of vigabatrin as an add-on drug in the management of severe epilepsy.  The effects of the addition of Vigabatrin, a new anti-epileptic drug, to the therapy of 128 patients with severe medically refractory epilepsy is reported.  Forty two (33%) of patients experienced side effects, which were predominantly neurotropic.  In 28 (22%), the drug was withdrawn because of these side effects.  The commonest side effects were drowsiness and behavioural change.  The remaining 100 patients were followed for a mean of 30 weeks (range 12-75).  Forty one of these patients showed a marked improvement in seizure frequency (a 50% or more reduction when compared with the pre-trial period), and nine (7%) were rendered seizure free.  Apparent tolerance to the effects of the drug were noted in five patients.  An exacerbation of seizures may occur if the drug is withdrawn too quickly.  Vigabatrin appears to be a promising new anti-epileptic drug.
Diurnal differences in response to oral levodopa.  Diurnal differences in duration and quality of motor response to levodopa are frequently described by patients.  The quality and duration of motor responses were objectively assessed to morning and afternoon oral levodopa doses in five patients with Parkinsonian motor fluctuations who complained of diurnal variation in response to their normal levodopa medication.  Results suggest that under controlled conditions which eliminated the effects of diet and overlapping levodopa effects the response to levodopa remained unchanged throughout the day, and that the duration of response could be predicted by plasma levodopa levels.
The accuracy of predictions about progress of patients on a stroke unit.  The aim of the study was to check the accuracy of predictions about the factors which affect the progress, in physical abilities and activities of daily living, of patients admitted to a stroke unit.  A series of 60 patients admitted consecutively to a stroke unit were assessed on tests of motor, functional and cognitive abilities at admission.  On the basis of these assessments predictions were made about the abilities of the patients at discharge.  Patients were assessed for level of motor abilities and activities of daily living at discharge and the accuracy of the predictions checked.  Predictions were found to be significantly correlated with outcome but the relationships were not so close as to be useful for the clinical management of individual patients.
Shy-Drager syndrome. Effect of fludrocortisone and L-threo-3,4-dihydroxyphenylserine on the blood pressure and regional cerebral blood flow.  In nine cases of Shy-Drager syndrome, the changes in blood pressure and cerebral blood flow on sitting up from a supine position were studied.  The influence of fludrocortisone, a synthetic mineralocorticoid, and L-threo-3,4-dihydroxyphenylserine (DOPS), a precursor of norepinephrine, on these changes was examined.  On sitting up, the regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) measured by Xe133 inhalation showed a tendency to decrease.  Fludrocortisone reduced the fall of the mean blood pressure significantly.  DOPS reduced the fall of both the diastolic blood pressure and rCBF significantly.
Functional outcomes following selective posterior rhizotomy in children with cerebral palsy.  The recent increase in popularity of selective posterior rhizotomy demands objective documentation of surgical outcome.  For this reason, the authors have analyzed the status of 25 children with spastic cerebral palsy before and after rhizotomy to determine the effects of this therapy on muscle tone, range of movement, and motor function.  Postoperative tests showed a reduction in muscle tone compared with preoperative assessments.  Range of motion in the lower extremities was significantly increased and improvements in functional gross motor skills were noted.  An increase in range of motion in the knees and thighs during gait was detected in 18 ambulatory patients studied with computerized two-dimensional motion analysis.  Preliminary findings indicate that selective posterior rhizotomy reduced spasticity, thereby increasing range of motion and contributing to improvements in active functional mobility.
Spontaneous neuronal hyperactivity in the medial and intralaminar thalamic nuclei of patients with deafferentation pain.  Electrical activity was recorded from single cells in the thalamus of 10 patients with chronic pain associated with deafferentation.  Under local anesthesia, these patients underwent either electrode implantation or thalamotomy for treatment of their pain.  In eight of the 10 patients, single units were identified as discharging spontaneously in high-frequency, often rhythmic, bursts.  The discharges were of two types: short bursts comprised of two to six spikes with a burst frequency of one to four per second; and long trains of 30 to 80 spikes of similar frequency.  Reconstruction of electrode trajectories indicated that recordings were made from the region corresponding to the lateral aspect of the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus, the central lateral nucleus, a small part of the central median nucleus, and the parafascicular nucleus.  In the eight patients in whom spontaneous neuronal burst activity was exhibited, it was impossible to study activity evoked by natural cutaneous stimulation due to the continuous spontaneous neuronal discharges.  Both animal and human studies have suggested that pain related to deafferentation is accompanied by spontaneous hyperactivity in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and in the ventral posterior thalamic nuclei.  The authors present evidence of spontaneous neuronal hyperactivity in the intralaminar thalamic nuclei of patients with pain related to deafferentation.  The findings suggest that spontaneous neuronal discharge in patients with pain related to deafferentation is more widespread in the central nervous system than has been previously appreciated.  The results have important implications for the surgical treatment of chronic pain.
Relationship between body and brain temperature in traumatically brain-injured rodents.  Recent work has shown that mild to moderate levels of hypothermia may profoundly reduce the histological and biochemical sequelae of cerebral ischemic injury.  In the present study, the authors examined the effect of fluid-percussion injury on brain temperature in anesthetized rats and the effect of anesthesia on brain temperature in uninjured rats.  The relationship between the brain, rectal, and temporalis muscle temperatures during normothermia, hypothermia, and hyperthermia was studied following a moderate magnitude of fluid-percussion brain injury (2.10 to 2.25 atmospheres) in rats.  The results showed that mean brain temperature in 10 anesthetized injured rats, in 21 anesthetized uninjured rats, and in 10 unanesthetized uninjured rats was a mean (+/- standard error of the mean) of 36.04 degrees +/- 0.20 degrees C, 36.30 degrees +/- 0.08 degrees C, and 37.95 degrees +/- 0.09 degrees C, respectively.  There was no significant difference in temperature under general anesthesia between injured and uninjured rats (p greater than 0.05).  In the absence of brain injury, mean brain temperature was significantly lower in anesthetized rats than in unanesthetized rats (p less than 0.001).  In anesthetized brain-injured rats, temporalis muscle temperature correlated well with brain temperature over a 30 degrees to 40 degrees C range, even when brain temperature was rapidly changed during induction of hypothermia or hyperthermia (r = 0.9986, p less than 0.0001).  In contrast, rectal temperature varied inconsistently from brain temperature.  These observations indicated that: 1) brain injury itself does not influence brain temperature in this model; 2) anesthesia alone decreases brain temperature to levels producing cerebral protection in this model; and 3) external monitoring of temporalis muscle temperature can provide a reliable indirect measure of brain temperature in the course of experimental brain injury.  The authors believe that it is essential to monitor or control brain temperature in studies of experimental brain injury.
Anticonvulsant and behavioral effects of two novel competitive N-methyl-D-aspartic acid receptor antagonists, CGP 37849 and CGP 39551, in the kindling model of epilepsy. Comparison with MK-801 and carbamazepine.  The orally active competitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists CGP 37849 (DL-[E]-2-amino-4-methyl-5-phosphono-3-pentenoic acid) and its ethyl ester CGP 39551 were evaluated in amygdala-kindled rats, a model for complex partial and secondarily generalized seizures.  Anticonvulsant and behavioral effects of these novel compounds were compared with those of the noncompetitive NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801 [(+)-5-methyl-10,11-dihydroxy-5H-dibenzo(a,d)cyclohepten-5,10-imin e] and the antiepileptic drug carbamazepine, one of the major drugs for treatment of partial and generalized seizures in humans.  For comparative evaluation, the compounds were injected i.p.  at the following doses: 1 to 10 mg/kg (CGP 37849 or CGP 39551), 0.05 to 0.3 mg/kg (MK-801) and 20 to 40 mg/kg (carbamazepine), respectively.  In contrast to carbamazepine, CGP 37849, CGP 39551 and MK-801 exerted only weak anticonvulsant effects in fully kindled rats and did not increase the focal seizure threshold.  The weak anticonvulsant effects of the NMDA receptor antagonists in kindled rats were associated with profound untoward behavioral effects.  The behavioral syndrome induced by the NMDA receptor antagonists in kindled rats was characterized by marked ataxia, hyperactivity and, in case of CGP 37849 and MK-801, stereotypies, such as head weaving.  The low or absent effectiveness of the novel NMDA receptor antagonists against kindled seizures suggests that these compounds will not be clinically useful antiepileptics against partial and secondarily generalized seizures.  Furthermore, in view of the recent clinical findings on psychotomimetic effects of MK-801 in epileptic patients, the similarities in the excitatory effects produced by CGP 39551, CGP 37849 and MK-801 in kindled rats may indicate that competitive NMDA receptor antagonists may also produce psychotomimetic effects in humans.
Rediscovering tactile agnosia.  Eighty-four patients with damage to various levels of the nervous system, ranging from the peripheral nerves to the cerebral cortex, underwent somesthetic assessment in order to determine the degree to which basic and complex perceptual and motor disorders affect tactile object recognition (TOR) and to determine whether TOR can be impaired in the absence of more basic sensorimotor imperception.  The results suggest that (1) basic and intermediate disorders of somesthetic function impair TOR but are commensurately more severe for any given degree of TOR impairment in patients with peripheral lesions than in patients with cortical lesions; (2) neither hemiparesis nor hemianopia alone precludes normal TOR; (3) hemineglect contributes substantially to TOR impairment; (4) impairment of TOR can occur in the absence of more basic somesthetic dysfunction and constitutes tactile agnosia; (5) tactile agnosia is a subtle, nondisabling disorder that should be distinguished from the nonagnosic, severe and disabling disorder, astereognosis; and (6) tactile agnosia results from unilateral damage to parietotemporal cortices, possibly including the second somatosensory cortex, in either hemisphere.
Monitoring of cortical blood flow during temporary arterial occlusion in aneurysm surgery by the thermal diffusion method.  During aneurysm surgery, regional cortical blood flow (CoBF) was continuously monitored in 12 patients with a thermal diffusion flow probe in an attempt to assess the effects of temporary major arterial occlusion on blood flow and outcome.  When the CoBF was above 30 ml/100 g/min, the safe period for temporary clipping applied distal to the perforators was 15 minutes.  The occlusion time should be shortened when the CoBF is below 30 ml/100 g/min.  Two patients suffered basal infarction, which was not detected by CoBF monitoring.  Attention should be paid to the blood flow in the deep structures when a temporary clip is applied at a site proximal to the perforating branches.  Direct measurement of CoBF may be of value in estimating the time that temporary occlusion of a major vessel can be tolerated.
Chronic headache associated with a functioning shunt: usefulness of pressure monitoring.  Chronic headaches in a shunt-dependent patient with small ventricles has long been treated with little or no regard to intracranial pressure.  In this study, pressure monitoring on 12 such patients demonstrated that they fell into three distinct categories: 3 had headaches caused by intracranial hypertension, 2 had headaches from hypotension, and 7 showed no relation of symptoms to pressure.  As therapeutic procedures for treating these three categories are entirely different and sometimes opposing, it is clear that intracranial pressure monitoring is essential to successful management of this complaint.
Intracranial aneurysms: interventional neurovascular treatment with detachable balloons--results in 215 cases   Patients with complex or surgically difficult intracranial aneurysms are being treated with interventional neurovascular techniques.  With neuroleptic anesthesia and a transfemoral femoral approach, a silicone micro-balloon can be flow directed through the intracranial circulation, guided directly into the aneurysm, and detached.  The aneurysm is thus eliminated from the circulation, and the parent artery is preserved.  For broad-based or ectatic aneurysms, test occlusion followed by permanent occlusion of the aneurysm and parent vessel can be performed.  Since 1981, 211 patients with 215 aneurysms, including 177 cases involving the anterior and 38 cases involving the posterior circulation, have been treated with this technique.  In 127 cases (59.1%), the parent vessel was occluded; in 88 cases (40.9%), primary occlusion of the aneurysm was achieved with preservation of the parent artery.  Therapy-related complications included 21 deaths (9.8%) and 16 strokes (7.4%).  Follow-up examinations were performed at 1, 3, and 12 months after treatment, and follow-up ranged from 5 months to 9 years.  In patients in whom standard surgical therapy fails or for aneurysms in surgically inaccessible anatomic locations, interventional techniques that make use of detachable balloons may be a useful therapeutic alternative.
Mapping the distribution of amobarbital sodium in the intracarotid Wada test by use of Tc-99m HMPAO with SPECT.  The intracarotid amobarbital sodium, or Wada, test has been used to localize speech and memory function prior to surgical treatment of temporal lobe seizures.  The authors mixed technetium-99m hexamethyl-propyleneamine oxime (HMPAO) with amobarbital sodium and injected the mixture in 25 patients with epilepsy.  Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) of the brain was then performed to determine intracerebral distribution of the amobarbital sodium.  Results of SPECT were compared with those of conventional and digital subtraction angiography (DSA).  The distribution of Tc-99m HMPAO and, presumably, amobarbital sodium varied from patient to patient.  SPECT revealed a statistically different distribution from that predicted with conventional angiography.  The distribution also often differed from that of DSA, although the difference was not significant.  SPECT revealed infrequent delivery to mesial temporal lobe structures.  This emphasizes the need for caution in the use of the intracarotid amobarbital sodium test to predict the outcome of removal of these areas.
Developmental dyslexia in women: neuropathological findings in three patients.  Brains from male cases with dyslexia show symmetry of the planum temporale and predominantly left-sided cerebrocortical microdysgenesis.  We now report on three women with dyslexia.  In all brains, the planum temporale was again symmetrical.  Also, in two of the brains, multiple foci of cerebrocortical glial scarring were present.  In both women, many of the scars were myelinated, suggesting origination during late intrauterine or early postnatal life.  In one, scars were mainly left perisylvian and involved portions of the vascular border zone of the temporal cortex.  In the other, scars were more numerous and occurred in the border zone of the anterior, middle, and posterior cerebral arteries symmetrically.  All three cases showed to a variable extent brain warts, molecular layer ectopias, and focal architectonic dysplasia identical to those seen in the male cases.  Two women had primary brain neoplasms, an oligodendroglioma and a low-grade astrocytoma, respectively, and two women showed small angiomas.  Reexamination of previously reported male cases disclosed one with myelinated glial scars.  Two control brains with asymmetrical plana temporale showed myelinated glial scars as well.  The significance of the anatomical findings is discussed, and possible etiological factors are considered with known effects of autoimmune diseases on the nervous system.
Timing and topography of cerebral blood flow, aura, and headache during migraine attacks.  Ten years of study has resulted in considerable but fragmented knowledge about regional cerebral blood flow in migraine with aura (classic migraine).  In the present study, the number of repeatedly studied patients (n = 63) was large enough to determine statistically significant sequences of events and statistically significant spatial relations.  The first observable event was a decrease of regional cerebral blood flow posteriorly in one cerebral hemisphere.  Further development of this pathological process was accompanied by the aura symptoms.  Thereafter headache occurred while regional cerebral blood flow remained decreased.  During the headache phase, regional cerebral blood flow gradually changed from abnormally low to abnormally high without apparent change in headache.  In some patients headache disappeared while regional cerebral blood flow remained increased.  Although regional cerebral blood flow reduction and aura symptoms in the great majority of patients were unilateral, one-third had bilateral headache.  Unilateral headache usually localized to the side on which regional cerebral blood flow was reduced and from which the aura symptoms originated (i.e., aura symptoms were perceived to occur contralaterally but presumably originated in the hypoperfused hemisphere).  Our results suggest a simple model for migraine attacks: A pathological disturbance in one cerebral hemisphere causes the aura symptoms and after a time delay, it also causes the headache by stimulating local vascular nociceptors.  Bilateral headache caused by a unilateral cerebral disturbance may be explained by recent neuroanatomical and neurophysiological findings.
Ataxia and peripheral neuropathy: a benign variant of peroxisome dysgenesis.  A 5-year-old boy with panperoxisomal dysfunction is described.  Clinical features included hypotonia, areflexia, and ataxia.  Cognition, vision, hearing, and hepatic function were normal.  A panel of peroxisomal markers, including very-long-chain fatty acids, phytanic acid, pipecolic acid, and catalase compartmentalization, were abnormal.  This is a uniquely benign syndrome of disordered peroxisome biogenesis.
OKT3 encephalopathy.  OKT3 therapy for induction immunosuppression in a patient who underwent renal transplantation produced obtundation and quadriparesis associated with computed tomographic scan evidence of brain edema.  These findings resolved over 3 days with supportive therapy and OKT3 withdrawal.
Orocaecal transit time in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.  Smooth muscle degeneration may occur in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.  We measured fasting orocaecal transit time in patients with advanced Duchenne muscular dystrophy and other muscular dystrophies and in healthy controls.  No significant differences were found.  In contrast to reports of gastric hypomotility in Duchenne muscular dystrophy, we found no evidence of impaired small intestinal motility.
The effect of pH buffering on reducing the pain associated with subcutaneous infiltration of bupivicaine [published erratum appears in Am J Emerg Med 1991 Jul;9(4):410]  The authors propose that pH buffering of bupivicaine with sodium bicarbonate reduces the pain associated with its local subcutaneous infiltration.  In a double-blind, prospective study, 62 healthy adult volunteers received a 0.5 mL subcutaneous infiltration of 0.5% buffered bupivicaine into the dorsum of a randomly chosen hand.  The pH was adjusted to 7.0 by adding 0.05 mL of sodium bicarbonate (1 mEq/L [corrected]) to 10 mL vials of commercially available bupivicaine (1:200 dilution).  The control hand was injected with the same amount of unbuffered agent.  Pain was scored after each infiltration using a nonsegmented visual analogue scale.  Student's t-test for paired measurements was used to analyze intergroup pain score differences.  Forty-three subjects (69%) reported less pain with buffered bupivicaine and only 17 (27%) noted a modest increase: two subjects (3%) reported no difference.  The mean pain score for the buffered agent was 22 mm compared with 30 mm for the control.  The mean difference (control-experimental) was 8 mm (t = 4.64, df = 61, P less than .001).  The authors conclude that the addition of sodium bicarbonate to bupivicaine reduces the pain associated with its local infiltration.
Research in physical medicine and rehabilitation. XII. Measurement tools with application to brain injury.  There are basic principles and techniques of measurement that are relevant across biomedical disciplines.  The purpose of this article is to explain some of the most important of these for medical rehabilitation, to illustrate how to use them to choose assessment instruments and to describe the nature of measurement in medical rehabilitation by examples in brain injury rehabilitation.  Reliability is basic to any scientific measure.  Validity, the ultimate criterion, is closely associated with the purpose of the measure.  Content validity, criterion validity and construct validity are explained.  Sensitivity to rehabilitative interventions and significance in patients' real lives (ecological validity) are emphasized.  Measures of functional outcomes (disability) may show improvement after rehabilitation even when impairment measures do not.  An extensive but selected list of measures of coma, global status, disabilities, communicative and cognitive impairments, and handicaps is presented, and their main uses are illustrated.  Examples illustrate how to choose measures to study comprehensive program-level outcomes, to study learning-based interventions and to develop a general purpose database.  Although there are many measures of activities of daily living and mobility, little published evidence of reliability and validity could be found even for some well-known scales.  Ecologically valid and sensitive outcome measures are especially needed.  Studies of the clinical utility of measures were also scarce.  Many of these gaps can be spanned by clinical researchers with limited resources.  Physical medicine and rehabilitation will benefit from formal studies of the reliabilities and validities of both its old and its new measurement instruments and by increased sophistication in choice of measures.
Recovery time of independent function post-stroke.  Stroke patients undergoing physical rehabilitation were monitored daily to determine the length of time needed to recover independent function.  Of the 93 patients admitted, there were 45 who could not attain the sitting position independently, 75 who could not walk independently and 75 who could not negotiate the stairs independently.  By discharge, 25 of 45 patients (55.6%) were able to attain sitting from supine independently, 35 of 75 patients (46.7%) achieved the ability to walk independently but only 25 of 75 patients (33.3%) learned to negotiate stairs independently.  The time from admission to achievement of independent function and the time from onset of stroke to achievement of independent function was modeled in relation to explanatory variables: age, sex, side of lesion, comorbidity, the presence of depression and the extent of impairment in perception, cognition, auditory comprehension and verbal expression.  Four variables were found to influence recovery time: age influenced the rate of recovery of walking and stair climbing; perceptual impairment influenced the rate of achieving independent sitting and stair climbing; and depression and comprehension influenced walking.
Ventilatory function as a predictor of fatal stroke.  OBJECTIVE--To investigate the relation between ventilatory function and subsequent mortality due to cerebrovascular disease.  DESIGN--Prospective longitudinal study.  SUBJECTS--A total of 18,403 male civil servants aged 40-64 years at entry examination for the Whitehall study.  MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE--Mortality from cerebrovascular disease (ICD8 430-438) after 18 years of follow up.  RESULTS--In all, 262 men with sinus rhythm at entry died due to stroke during the 18 years of follow up.  Compared with men with a forced expiratory volume in one second of greater than or equal to 3.5 litres those with a value of less than 3.0 litres were almost twice as likely to die of cerebrovascular disease (rate ratio adjusted for age and systolic blood pressure = 1.88, 95% confidence interval 1.32 to 2.69).  This increased risk occurred within each tertile of systolic blood pressure.  Nested case-control analyses were used to control precisely for confounding effects of age, height, and smoking (by matching) and employment grade and physiological risk factors (by modelling).  The effect of forced expiratory volume in one second was independent of age, height, smoking habits, employment grade, blood pressure, weight, cholesterol concentration, glucose tolerance, electrocardiographic abnormalities, history of chest pain, and history of intermittent claudication.  CONCLUSIONS--Measurements of ventilatory function may assist clinical decisions about whether to treat mild hypertension.  Impaired ventilatory function and stroke may share common causes.
Availability of transplantable organs from brain stem dead donors in intensive care units.  OBJECTIVE--By audit from January to June 1989 to quantify, separately for hearts, kidneys, liver, lungs and corneas, the possible increases in transplantable organs from brain stem dead potential donors in intensive care units and to compare them with the increases achieved in October-November 1989, during intense, national publicity about transplantation.  DESIGN--Prospective audit of all deaths in intensive care units in England from 1 January to 30 June 1989 and subsequent case study of the impact of publicity on offers and donations during October-November 1989.  SETTING--15 regional and special health authorities in England.  PATIENTS--5803 patients dying in intensive care units, of whom 497 were confirmed as brain stem dead and had no general medical contraindication to organ donation.  MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES--Organ specific suitability for transplantation (as reported by intensive care units); consent for donation of specific suitable organs; and procurement of specific organs reported as suitable for transplantation and offered.  RESULTS--In the 497 (8.6%) brain stem dead potential donors were estimated the organ specific suitability for heart as 63%, kidneys 95%, liver 70%, lungs 29%, and corneas 91%.  Refusal of relatives (30%) accounted for major losses of suitable organs of all types.  For kidneys the loss was equivalent to 44% of brain stem dead actual kidney donors.  No discussion of organ donation was the second most important reason for missed kidney donors, the loss being equivalent to 10% of brain stem dead actual donors.  Non-procurement or difficulties with allocating organs was the second most notable cause of missed suitable liver and lung donors; 29% (55) of the offered total of 189 liver donors and 27% (21) of 78 offered suitable lung donors in six months.  Non-procurement of suitable, offered organs was rare for kidneys and modest, of the order of 13% and 10% respectively, for heart and corneas.  Corneal donation from brain stem dead potential donors might be improved nearly as much (that is, a 78% increase in brain stem dead actual corneal donors) by specific measures to promote corneal donation when other organs are offered as by reducing the overall refusal rate.  Restricted offers, non-procurement, and no discussion of donation accounted for nearly equal numbers of lost donations of hearts (each equivalent to 15% of donated hearts).  During October-November 1989 when there was intense, positive publicity about transplantation the rates of refusal and non-discussion fell compared with during January-June (22%, 36/163 v 30%, 138/460; 7%, 33/497 v 2%, 4/167 respectively).  Offers of suitable donors increased significantly (p less than 0.02) compared with the first six months of 1989, most notably for heart donors (80 v 60.1 expected) and kidney donors (122 v 102.1 expected) but only for kidneys was there a noticeable 17% increase in actual donors (118 actual audited donors v 100.8 expected donors; p = 0.09).  CONCLUSIONS--Four strategies to increase the supply of transplantable organs from brain stem dead potential donors in intensive care units were identified: (a) reducing refusal of relatives (b) avoiding non-procurement of actually suitable organs (by logistical initiatives) and deterioration of initially suitable organs (by donor care initiatives); (c) converting restricted offers to unrestricted offers; and (d) ensuring discussion with families.  Early referral to the transplant team or coordinator gives time for discussion about donor care and agreement on medical suitability for donation of specific organs.  Solving some of the logistical problems of non-procurement may be a prerequisite for increased offers to be translated into increased donations.  The impact of publicity therefore needs to be measured on offers of suitable donors as well as by actual donations.
Dacron-woven pacemaker pouch. Influence on long-term pacemaker mobility.  Pacemaker migration can interfere with correct pacing system function and patient comfort.  A Dacron pouch has been developed which may prevent these problems.  To assess the efficacy of the pouch, we measured various factors of pacemaker mobility in 100 patients after long-term follow-up.  The patients were divided into three groups on the basis of their dictated operative reports: group 1, no pouch or anchoring stitch; group 2, pouch only; group 3, anchoring stitch to pacemaker header or pouch.  The average age of the study population was 74.3 +/- 11 years.  Total follow-up time was 42 +/- 28 months (group I, 53 +/- 32 months; group 2, 36 +/- 23 months; group 3, 34 +/- 25 months).  There were no significant differences when pacemakers were measured for movement in the inferosuperior and lateromedial directions, nor was there any difference in the distance between the incision scar and the pacemaker header in any group.  There was a significant difference between group 1 and groups 2 and 3 when the degree of tilt of the pacemaker off the chest wall was compared.  This was 46 degrees +/- 34 degrees for group 1 and 27 degrees +/- 26 degrees and 26 degrees +/- 27 degrees for groups 2 and 3, respectively (p less than 0.02 for both).  These data suggest that the Dacron pouch does not restrict pacemaker mobility parallel to the chest wall during long-term follow-up but does reduce the angle to which the pacemaker can be tilted relative to the chest wall.
Sleepwalking precipitated by treatment of sleep apnea with nasal CPAP.  A 33-year-old man with a long history of snoring, observed apneic episodes, and excessive daytime sleepiness, underwent all-night polysomnography, which demonstrated severe obstructive sleep apnea.  During the nasal CPAP trial, two episodes of sleepwalking were observed during a period of delta sleep rebound.
Alzheimer's disease and related disorders in state mental hospitals: data from a nationwide survey.  Notwithstanding three decades of transferring of the elderly to nursing homes, geriatric patients continue to reside in state mental hospitals.  Many of these patients, perhaps one-third or more, are thought to suffer from Alzheimer's disease and related disorders (ADRD).  This study reports data from a nationwide survey of state hospitals that provides an exploratory look at the ADRD patients currently served in state hospitals.  Admission trends, reasons for admission, and sources of referral are described.  Civil commitment of nursing home patients with dementing illnesses and the place of the state hospital in the continuum of care for ADRD patients are discussed.
Differences in the membrane interaction of scrapie amyloid precursor proteins in normal and scrapie- or Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease-infected brains.  The membrane interaction and hydrophobicity of the normal (PrPC) and infectious isoform (PrPSc/CJD) of scrapie and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease amyloid precursor proteins was studied.  The normal isoform of hamster and human scrapie amyloid precursor protein was found on the microsomal/synaptosomal membranes anchored solely by the C-terminal glycolipid.  Glycolipid cleavage resulted in dissociation from the membranes and change of behavior from a highly hydrophobic to a hydrophilic protein, susceptible to proteases.  In contrast, the PrPSc/CJD isoform was resistant to release by glycolipid-cleaving enzymes.  A part of PrPSc/CJD was released from the membranes after prolonged trypsin treatment, yielding a further protease-resistant product of 27-30 kDa.  The results demonstrate the proteolytic resistance of the membrane-bound PrPSc/CJD isoform and also indicate the presence of a different, apparently disease-induced mechanism of membrane interaction in the scrapie- and CJD-infected microsomal and synaptosomal membranes.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease from allogeneic dura: a review of risks and safety.  Surgeons and the lay public have recently expressed concern over the safety of allogeneic dura as it relates to the transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease.  Indeed, two cases have resulted from use of tissue procured from a commercial agency that did not adhere to criteria accepted by the American Association of Tissue Banks or the Southeast Organ Procurement Foundation.  This review discusses the risks and safety of allogeneic dura.  The findings should reassure the surgeon of the safety of allogeneic dura when it is properly processed and catalogued by a bona fide, reputable tissue bank.  To date, there have been no documented cases reported to the Center for Disease Control in which Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease was transmitted from allogeneic dura obtained from a registered tissue bank.
Clinical diagnostic considerations on cocaine abuse.  Following a review of the research literature on the psychophysiological effects of cocaine, a study is described of a group of 120 cocaine addicts.  Of the 120 patients, 10 (8.33%) exhibited fleeting, unformed, organic delusions and hallucinations.  Case reports of the 10 cases are presented.  The quality of the adverse subjective effects of cocaine is emphasized, and the differential diagnosis between Cocaine Delusional Disorder and Paranoid Schizophrenia is discussed.  Guidelines for a more accurate differential diagnosis are provided.
Neurobehavioral effects of phenytoin prophylaxis of posttraumatic seizures   In order to determine potential negative neurobehavioral effects of phenytoin given to prevent the development of posttraumatic seizures, 244 subjects were randomized to phenytoin or placebo.  They received neurobehavioral assessments at 1 and 12 months postinjury while receiving their assigned drug and at 24 months while receiving no drugs.  In the severely injured, phenytoin significantly impaired performance at 1 month.  No significant differences were found as a function of phenytoin in the moderately injured patients at 1 month or in either severity group at 1 year.  Patients who stopped receiving phenytoin according to protocol between 1 and 2 years improved more than corresponding placebo cases on several measures.  We conclude that phenytoin has negative cognitive effects.  This, combined with lack of evidence for its effectiveness in preventing posttraumatic seizures beyond the first week, raises questions regarding its use for long-term prophylaxis.  Our findings do not negate phenytoin's proven efficacy in controlling established seizures nor do they indicate that its cognitive effects are worse than other anticonvulsant drugs.
Physical and pharmacologic restraint of nursing home patients with dementia. Impact of specialized units   This case-control study of 31 specialized dementia units and 32 traditional units in five states investigated use of physical and pharmacologic restraints among 625 patients with the diagnosis of dementia.  Physical restraints were observed in use on 18.1% of dementia unit patients and on 51.6% of comparison unit patients who were out of bed during the day (adjusted odds ratio, 0.283;95% confidence interval, 0.129 to 0.619).  Pharmacologic restraints were routinely given to 45.3% of dementia unit patients and 43.4% of comparison unit patients (adjusted odds ratio, 0.950; 95% confidence interval, 0.611 to 1.477).  We used multivariate logistic regression to identify residence in a nonspecialized nursing home unit, nonambulatory status, transfer dependency, mental status impairment, hip fracture history, and a high nursing staff-to-patient ratio, which we found to be independent predictors of physical restraint use.  Physically abusive behavior, severe mental status impairment, and frequent family visitation were found to be significant predictors of pharmacologic restraint use, while advanced patient age, large nursing home size, and patient nonambulatory status were protective against such use.  These results support the conclusion that physical and pharmacologic restraint constitute separate treatment modalities with different risk factors for use, and indicate that specialized dementia units are successful in reducing the use of physical but not pharmacologic restraints.
Retrovirus-induced spongiform myeloencephalopathy in mice: regional distribution of infected target cells and neuronal loss occurring in the absence of viral expression in neurons.  The Cas-Br-E murine leukemia virus (MuLV) induces a spongiform myeloencephalopathy resulting in a progressive hindlimb paralysis.  We have used in situ hybridization with a Cas-Br-E MuLV-specific probe to study viral expression in the central nervous system.  Infected cells were concentrated in regions where spongiform lesions and gliosis are detected (lumbosacral spinal cord, brainstem, deep cerebellar regions), suggesting a causative link between the level of virus expression and the degree of pathological changes in this disease.  However, viral expression was not in itself sufficient to cause disease, since significant viral expression was observed in regions that did not exhibit pathological changes (cerebellar cortex, hippocampus, corpus callosum, peripheral nervous system).  In both diseased and nondiseased regions, endothelial and glial cells were identified as the main target cells.  Neurons in diseased regions did not show viral expression.  The regional distribution of the spongiform changes appears to be laid down very early following infection, since expression could be detected at 10 days postinfection in regions that become diseased.  These results indicate that nonneuronal cells have distinct properties in various regions of the central nervous system and suggest an indirect mechanism of neuronal loss consequent to viral expression in nonneuronal cells.
Response to suxamethonium in a myasthenic patient during remission.  A cumulative dose followed by an infusion was used to determine the dose response to suxamethonium in a patient with diagnosed myasthenia gravis who was in true remission (asymptomatic while receiving no therapy).  The ED50 and ED90 values for suxamethonium were 0.08 mg/kg and 0.20 mg/kg, and an infusion rate of 3.2 mg/kg/hour was required to maintain a 90-95% depression of the single twitch response as monitored by integrated electromyography.  These values are within the range for normal patients, and we conclude that myasthenic patients during a true remission may not demonstrate resistance to suxamethonium.
Modification of pain on injection of propofol--a comparison between lignocaine and procaine.  Pain on injection of propofol was assessed in a controlled, randomised study of 273 patients.  They received either lignocaine 10 mg, procaine 10 mg or isotonic saline 0.5 ml, 15 seconds before the injection of propofol into a vein on the back of the hand.  The incidence of pain on injection in the control group (51%) was comparable with other studies.  Lignocaine and procaine both significantly reduced the pain (35% and 34% respectively, p less than 0.05) but there was no statistical difference between these two groups.
Lidocaine potentiation of cocaine toxicity.  STUDY HYPOTHESIS: The toxic effects of cocaine are enhanced in the presence of lidocaine.  STUDY POPULATION: Male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 200 to 300 g.  METHODS: Animals received intraperitoneal injections of cocaine (10, 20, 35, or 50 mg/kg), lidocaine (30 or 40 mg/kg), or a combination of all doses of cocaine given simultaneously with 30 or 40 mg/kg lidocaine.  The incidence and time to seizure and death were recorded in these groups and compared by chi 2 and analysis of variance analyses, respectively.  RESULTS: At doses of 30 or 40 mg/kg, lidocaine does not induce seizures or death.  The effect of simultaneous injection of both cocaine and lidocaine was to dramatically increase the incidence of both seizures and death over that of cocaine alone.  The incidence of seizures in animals receiving 35 mg/kg cocaine alone was 10%; this increased to 50% and 80% with the addition of 30 and 40 mg/kg lidocaine, respectively (P less than or equal to .05; P less than or equal to .01).  Death did not occur in animals receiving 35 mg/kg cocaine alone; the addition of 30 and 40 mg/kg lidocaine resulted in death in 30% and 60% of animals, respectively (P less than or equal to .01 each group).  Similarly, in rats receiving 50 mg/kg cocaine, the incidence of death increased from 0% to 60% and 80% with 30 and 40 mg/kg lidocaine, respectively (P less than or equal to .01).  CONCLUSION: In the rat, overall toxicity of cocaine is significantly increased with simultaneous exposure to lidocaine.
Genetic cause of a juvenile form of Tay-Sachs disease in a Lebanese child.  Abnormality in the beta-hexosaminidase alpha gene underlying the clinical phenotype of a Lebanese patient with a juvenile form of Tay-Sachs disease has been studied.  Clinical features were progressive spasticity, ataxia, and cognitive decline.  The protein coding sequence of several beta-hexosaminidase alpha-chain complementary DNAs isolated by polymerase chain reaction was completely normal except for a G-to-A transition at nucleotide position 1511 within exon 13, which resulted in substitution of the normal arginine 504 (CGC) with histidine (CAC).  Although the patient was from a first-cousin marriage, she was heterozygous for this mutation.  The abnormality in the other allele, which is carried by the father, was not identified, except that it is neither of the two mutations responsible for the infantile Jewish Tay-Sachs disease.  Biosynthetic and immunoprecipitation studies in cultured fibroblasts showed synthesis of the alpha-chain precursor, but the mature form of the alpha-subunit was not detected.
Neuroanatomy of fragile X syndrome: the posterior fossa.  The occurrence and specificity of posterior fossa abnormalities as measured from magnetic resonance images of the brain were investigated in a group of 14 males with fragile X syndrome and comparison groups consisting of 17 males with other causes of developmental disability and 18 males with normal IQs.  The size of the posterior cerebellar vermis was significantly decreased and the fourth ventricle significantly increased in the group of males with fragile X syndrome compared with males in both comparison groups.  These neuroanatomical abnormalities appeared to be secondary to hypoplasia rather than atrophy.
Visual dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease: relation to normal aging [published erratum appears in Ann Neurol 1991 Mar;29(3):271]  In patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), compared with age-matched and young healthy control subjects, visual deficits in the following functions were observed: color, stereoacuity, contrast sensitivity, and backward masking (homogeneous and pattern).  Critical flicker fusion thresholds were normal, relative to age-matched healthy subjects.  For color, the majority of the errors were tritanomalous (blue axis).  Color and stereoacuity deficits were unrelated to severity of dementia, in accordance with models of vision that describe these functions as modular rather than diffuse for cortical localization.  Although contrast sensitivity was depressed throughout the frequency range in AD, more patients were impaired at low than at high spatial frequencies, contrasting with the observed normal aging pattern of high-frequency loss.  Healthy elderly subjects showed depressed critical flicker fusion thresholds and reduced contrast sensitivity at high frequencies, relative to the young group; differences between these groups were not found for the other vision tests.  A subset of the AD group received detailed neuro-ophthalmological examination, and no abnormalities were found.  This finding, taken together with normal thresholds for critical flicker fusion, suggests that the widespread visual dysfunction reported here is more likely to be related to known pathological changes in primary visual and association cortex in AD than to changes in the retina or optic nerve.
Nerve growth factor prevents toxic neuropathy in mice.  Taxol is a promising new antitumor drug with therapeutic use that is limited by a toxic sensory neuropathy.  Taxol is also cytotoxic to dorsal root ganglion neurons in vitro, but this effect is prevented by cotreatment with the trophic protein, nerve growth factor.  We sought to develop an animal model and then to determine whether nerve growth factor can prevent taxol neuropathy in vivo.  Administration of taxol to mice resulted in a profound sensory neuropathy characterized by decreases in dorsal root ganglion content of the peptide neurotransmitter, substance P, elevated threshold to thermally induced pain, and diminished amplitude of the compound action potential in the caudal nerve.  Coadministration of nerve growth factor prevented all of these signs of neurotoxicity.  These findings suggest that administration of nerve growth factor may prevent certain toxic sensory neuropathies.
Localization of 3H-dihydroergotamine-binding sites in the cat central nervous system: relevance to migraine.  Dihydroergotamine (DHE) is the treatment of choice in aborting the acute attack of migraine.  Although its efficacy has been known for 40 years, its mechanism of action is still disputed.  Data regarding the site of action of dihydroergotamine may provide an insight into its mechanism of action and thus identify a locus of potentially abnormal pathophysiology in migraine.  By using in vitro and ex vivo autoradiographic techniques, the localization of specific binding sites for 3H-dihydroergotamine in the cat brain has been examined.  Binding was seen in the dorsal horn of the cervical spinal cord, in the medulla, associated with the nucleus of the tractus solitarius, area postrema, and descending spinal trigeminal nucleus, and in the mesencephalon and the cerebral cortex.  The highest density of binding sites was found in the dorsal and medial raphe nuclei of the midbrain.  Furthermore, these same brain regions were also labeled after intravenous administration of 3H-dihydroergotamine.  It is important that the brain areas specifically labeled are key nuclei involved in cranial pain transmission, suggesting that dihydroergotamine may act at these central sites in migraine.
Neurologic status of spina bifida patients and the orthopedic surgeon.  The purpose of this paper is to review recent developments in the neurologic assessment of spina bifida patients.  Determination of the neurosegmental level of the lesion, recognition of spasticity and progressive paralysis, the potential for deformity, and functional expectations are described.  The status of the neurologic deficit remains the most important factor in determining the myelomeningocele patient's ultimate functional abilities.  Accurate neurologic assessment will assist in meeting the aims of orthopedic management, which include preventing joint contracture, correcting deformity, preventing skin sores, and obtaining the best possible locomotor function.
Gait analysis in the treatment of the ambulatory child with cerebral palsy.  Surgical treatment of children with cerebral palsy has changed from staged, single joint procedures to comprehensive simultaneous bony and soft-tissue corrections.  This regimen of treating multiple joint levels and planes of abnormality is subject to error when based solely on the clinical examination.  A more scientific evaluation can be provided by the use of clinical gait analysis.  Both preoperative and postoperative analyses provide the clinician with information from which neurologic patterns can be determined and surgical protocols can be judged.
Impact of day care on dementia patients--costs, well-being and relatives' views.  Forty-seven patients in psychogeriatric day centre were analysed regarding use of resources, costs and well-being.  The level of well-being was based on interviews with staff and relatives and related to the economic outcome--a cost utility analysis.  A 6 month period prior to day care was compared with the first 6 months in such care.  The use of resources at home increased by 20% while the use of institutional care was reduced by 22%.  Fifty-three percent of the patients improved in their well-being after participation in day care.  When the cost of utility analysis was applied, the cost for a well-year was 4293 pounds.
Serum creatinine: an independent predictor of survival after stroke.  We prospectively studied the relationship between serum creatinine and survival among 492 elderly subjects admitted for stroke and monitored for a mean period of 18 months post-stroke.  In multivariate proportional hazards models, serum creatinine remained an independent predictor of mortality (P = 0.0001) after accounting for other important predictors such as level of consciousness.  Mini-Mental State Score, age, leucocyte count, presence of heart disease, diabetes, heart failure, atrial fibrillation and use of cardiovascular medication.  This association between elevated serum creatinine and mortality was also found in patient subgroups with CT-proven infarction and intracerebral haematoma.  It is concluded that serum creatinine is an independent predictor of survival after stroke.  Further studies are required to confirm this relationship and to elucidate the underlying mechanism.
Intracranial hypertension in relation to memory functioning during the first year after severe head injury.  The relationship between intracranial hypertension and residual memory deficit after closed head injury was evaluated using the 6-month and 1-year neurobehavioral outcome data obtained by the Traumatic Coma Data Bank.  Intracranial pressure was analyzed using the percentage of time that it exceeded 20 mm Hg and the maximum value recorded during the first 72 hours after injury.  Memory measures included recall of word lists, prose recall, and visual memory for designs that were obtained 6 months (n = 149) and 1 year (n = 132) after injury.  Intracranial hypertension occurred in more than half of the Traumatic Coma Data Bank cohort who met the criteria for the neurobehavioral follow-up study.  Linear regression analysis disclosed an effect of elevated intracranial pressure on some, but not all, measures of memory at 6 months, whereas the results were negative for the 1-year follow-up examination.  We conclude that the elevation of intracranial pressure exerts little if any effect on later memory functioning, and that any effect it does have diminishes over 1 year in survivors of severe head injury.
The influence of the calcium antagonist nimodipine and induced hypertension on the behavior of the cerebral pial arteries, the blood-brain barrier, cerebral edema, and cerebral infarction in cats with one-hour occlusion of the middle cerebral artery.  Thirty anesthetized cats were randomly assigned to one of three groups of 10 cats each: nimodipine treatment, nimodipine treatment combined with induced hypertension, or a control group.  The behavior of the cerebral pial arteries was measured by means of microscopic observation through a cranial window.  The middle cerebral artery of each cat was clipped for 1 hour via the transorbital approach.  Five hours after circulation was reestablished in the middle cerebral artery, Evans blue dye was injected intravenously: 30 minutes later, the animal was killed.  Administration of nimodipine or saline in the treated or control group was started 5 minutes before the middle cerebral artery was clipped and maintained until the end of the experiment.  Induced hypertension was produced by administration of dopamine during the occlusion.  Damage to the blood-brain barrier (BBB) was judged by extravasation of Evans blue dye.  Cerebral edema and infarction were evaluated from histological findings.  They were most prominent in the control group: the extent of hemisphere affected was as follows (mean +/- standard error): extravasation, 40.5 +/- 8.8%; edema, 43.2 +/- 5.7%; infarction, 35.5 +/- 9.6%.  On the other hand, the extravasation of Evans blue dye and cerebral edema were significantly more extensive in the group treated with nimodipine and induced hypertension (extravasation, 28.2 +/- 9.6% of the hemisphere; edema, 30.3 +/- 7.1%) than in the group treated with nimodipine alone (extravasation, 18.5 +/- 8.7% of the hemisphere; edema, 19.4 +/- 6.3%), but the infarction size was similar in both groups (16.6 +/- 4.9% of the hemisphere in the former; 17.0 +/- 6.2 in the latter).
Kenneth McKenzie, Harvey Cushing, and the early neurosurgical treatment of spasmodic torticollis.  In 1923, Dr.  Kenneth McKenzie trained at the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital under Dr.  Harvey Cushing.  At that time, a patient with spasmodic torticollis came to Cushing and was treated with an innovative operation for this disorder with good results.  This case sparked an interest in Dr.  McKenzie, who published the case 1 year later.  In reviewing the surgical histories from the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital, we have found the original records of this well-documented case.  The record includes postoperative drawings of the intraoperative field by Dr.  Cushing, a sketch by Dr.  McKenzie illustrating the postoperative sensory examination, and pre- and postoperative photographs of the patient.
Spinal man after declaration of brain death   Complex spinal automatism in a patient who was declared brain dead is described.  These movements tend to appear once cerebrospinal shock has abated.  We postulate that these manifestations are a reflection of the physiological potential of the isolated spinal cord.  These spinal movements should be included in the revised guidelines for the determination of cerebral death.
A comparison of midazolam with and without nalbuphine for intravenous sedation.  The introduction of nalbuphine to intravenous sedation with midazolam added little to the quality of sedation for short operative procedures.  There was a greater tendency for patients who received nalbuphine and midazolam to sleep in the afternoon after treatment compared with those who received only midazolam.  Significantly more patients had nausea and vomiting in the midazolam/nalbuphine group than did patients in the midazolam-only group.
Genetic mapping of new DNA probes at Xq27 defines a strategy for DNA studies in the fragile X syndrome.  The fragile X syndrome is the most common cause of familial mental retardation and is characterized by a fragile site at the end of the long arm of the X chromosome.  The unusual genetics and cytogenetics of this X-linked condition make genetic counseling difficult.  DNA studies were of limited value in genetic counseling, because the nearest polymorphic DNA loci had recombination fractions of 12% or more with the fragile X mutation, FRAXA.  Five polymorphic loci have recently been described in this region of the X chromosome.  The positions of these loci in relation to FRAXA were defined in a genetic linkage study of 112 affected families.  The five loci--DXS369, DXS297, DXS296, IDS, and DXS304--had recombination fractions of 4% or less with FRAXA.  The closest locus, DXS296, was distal to FRAXA and had a recombination fraction of 2%.  The polymorphisms at these loci can be detected in DNA enzymatically digested with a limited number of restriction endonucleases.  A strategy for DNA studies which is based on three restriction endonucleases and on five probes will detect one or more of these polymorphisms in 94% of women.  This strategy greatly increases the utility of DNA studies in providing genetic advice to families with the fragile X syndrome.
Intermediate hyperhomocysteinemia resulting from compound heterozygosity of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase mutations.  Four subjects with thermolabile methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) were discovered among 16 "obligate" heterozygotes for severe MTHFR deficiency and their family members.  All four subjects had less than 25% of normal mean MTHFR specific activity in lymphocyte extracts.  Three of them with normal serum folate and cyanocobalamin had intermediate hyperhomocysteinemia, and one with high serum folate and cyanocobalamin had no excessive accumulation of serum homocysteine.  The biochemical features in these four subjects are distinguishable from subjects homozygous for the thermolabile MTHFR, whose specific activity is approximately 50% of the normal mean, and from heterozygotes for severe MTHFR deficiency, in whom the enzyme is thermostable and has a specific activity of about 50% of the normal mean.  We propose that these four subjects are genetic compounds of the allele for the severe mutation and the allele for thermolabile mutation of the MTHFR gene.  It is postulated that subjects with this genetic compound are more susceptible to the development of intermediate hyperhomocysteinemia despite normal folate and B12 levels.  Nonetheless, hyperhomocysteinemia due to this compound heterozygosity is correctable by oral folic acid therapy.
Distribution of three alpha-chain beta-hexosaminidase A mutations among Tay-Sachs carriers.  DNA from 176 carriers of the Tay-Sachs gene was tested for the presence of the three mutations most commonly found among Ashkenazi Jews: the so-called insertion, splice junction, and adult mutations.  Among 148 Ashkenazi Jews tested, 108 had the insertion mutation, 26 had the splice junction mutation, five had the adult mutation, and nine had none of the three.  Among 28 non-Jewish carriers tested, most of whom were obligate carriers, four had the insertion mutation, one had the adult mutation, and the remaining 23 had none of the three.
Muscle rehabilitation in impaired elderly nursing home residents.  Based on observations of changes in muscle function associated with aging, and the exacerbation of these changes with frailty, a program of muscle strengthening has been developed to correct specific defects in muscles.  This pilot study was undertaken on 18 functionally impaired nursing home residents (age range 60 to 90 years) with markedly deteriorated muscle function (50%) secondary to age, disuse, and multiple chronic illnesses.  Fourteen of the subjects completed the six-week program without adverse effects.  In 75% of the patients, there was improved muscle function, with endurance, strength, and speed increasing 35%, 15%, and 10%, respectively.  After the program, many subjects increased their spontaneous activity and decreased their dependency.  The improvements were still evident four months after rehabilitation.  These results suggest that it may be possible, through a carefully supervised, short-term program of muscle rehabilitation, for nursing home residents to achieve an enhanced level of physical functioning.
Wrist flexion as an adjunct to the diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome.  The effects of five minutes of wrist flexion on median motor and sensory evoked potential latencies in 87 individuals were studied.  Nineteen subjects had carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) as diagnosed by increased median nerve latencies across the wrist, and 68 had values in the normal range and were assigned to the control group.  A slight prolongation of up to 0.5m sec of evoked potential latencies was observed in both groups after flexion, but the differences between the two groups were not significant to establish the value of adding wrist flexion to conventional screening methods.
Detecting lower motor neuron dysfunction of the pharynx and larynx with electromyography.  This study assessed the utility of clinical electromyography (EMG) for detecting lower motor neuron (LMN) or upper motor neuron (UMN) dysfunction affecting the intrinsic muscles of the larynx and pharynx.  Twenty-nine subjects were examined; their clinical diagnoses included perioperative nerve injury, cerebral infarction, and lateral medullary infarction.  Resting activity, motor unit action potential (MUAP) morphology, and MUAP recruitment were evaluated in every case.  Medical records (excluding EMG data) were analyzed for clinical evidence of LMN or UMN dysfunction in the intrinsic muscles of the larynx and pharynx.  The diagnosis of LMN dysfunction rested on clinical data consistent with cranial nerve injury, poliomyelitis, Wallenberg syndrome, or unilateral bulbar palsy.  Criteria for UMN dysfunction included previous cerebral (not brainstem) infarction or mass lesion or the presence of hemiparesis.  Electromyographic abnormalities were significantly associated with LMN dysfunction (p less than .05), but they were not significantly associated with UMN dysfunction.  Of the parameters tested, MUAP recruitment was the most sensitive (82%) and specific (92%).
Neurobehavioral effects of phenytoin, carbamazepine, and valproic acid: implications for use in traumatic brain injury.  Due to the risk of posttraumatic epilepsy, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and valproic acid are often prescribed for patients with traumatic brain injury (TBI).  In this review the literature is examined for evidence of neurobehavioral impairment due to carbamazepine, phenytoin, and valproic acid.  No comparative studies have been performed in the TBI population, making if difficult to determine if one of these medications is preferable.  Direct inference from studies on epilepsy patients to TBI patients is hazardous due to underlying differences in the two populations.  Reported findings for epilepsy patients are subtle and not consistent across studies.  All three drugs appear to exert some effect on cognitive and motor functions in epileptic patients, and these impairments worsen at increasing serum levels.  The varied length of experience with each drug makes it difficult to assign relative weight to the evidence for or against each.  A comparative assessment of cognitive and behavioral effects of anticonvulsants should be done in the TBI population.
Neuroacanthocytosis. A clinical, haematological and pathological study of 19 cases.  Nineteen cases are described, including 12 cases from three different families and 7 nonfamilial cases, in which multisystem neurological disease was associated with acanthocytosis in peripheral blood and normal plasma lipoproteins.  Mild acanthocytosis can easily be overlooked, and scanning electron microscopy may be helpful.  Some neurologically asymptomatic relatives with significant acanthocytosis were identified during family screening, including some who were clinically affected.  The mean age of onset was 32 (range 8-62) yrs and the clinical course was usually progressive but there was marked phenotypic variation.  Cognitive impairment, psychiatric features and organic personality change occurred in over half the cases, and more than one-third had seizures.  Orofaciolingual involuntary movements and pseudobulbar disturbance commonly caused dysphagia and dysarthria that was sometimes severe, but biting of the lips or tongue was rarely seen.  Chorea was seen in almost all symptomatic cases but dystonia, tics, involuntary vocalizations and akinetic-rigid features also occurred.  Two cases had no movement disorder at all.  Computerized tomography often demonstrated cerebral atrophy.  Caudate atrophy was seen less commonly, and nonspecific focal and symmetric signal abnormalities from the caudate or lentiform nuclei were seen by magnetic resonance imaging in 3 out of 4 cases.  Depression or absence of tendon reflexes was noted in 13 cases and neurophysiological abnormalities often indicated an axonal neuropathy.  Sural nerve biopsies from 3 cases showed evidence of a chronic axonal neuropathy with prominent regenerative activity, predominantly affecting the large diameter myelinated fibres.  Serum creatine kinase activity was increased in 11 cases but without clinical evidence of a myopathy.  Postmortem neuropathological examination in 1 case revealed extensive neuronal loss and gliosis affecting the corpus striatum, pallidum, and the substantia nigra, especially the pars reticulata.  The cerebral cortex appeared spared and the spinal cord showed no evidence of anterior horn cell loss.  Two examples of the McLeod phenotype, an X-linked abnormality of expression of Kell blood group antigens, were identified in a single family and included 1 female.  The genetics of neuroacanthocytosis are unclear and probably heterogeneous, but the available pedigree data and the association with the McLeod phenotype suggest that there may be a locus for this disorder on the short arm of the X chromosome.
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension. A prospective study of 50 patients.  Management of patients with idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) should be based on the presence and progression of visual loss.  To characterize the clinical course of IIH more completely, we monitored the clinical status, especially visual function, in 50 consecutive newly-diagnosed patients over a period of 2 to 39 months (average follow-up 12.4 months).  The mean age at onset of symptoms was 31 (range 11-58) yrs; 46 (92%) were women and 47 (94%) were obese (mean weight 90 kg).  Common symptoms were headache (92%), transient visual obscurations (72%) and intracranial noises (60%); 13 of the patients (26%) initially had complaints of sustained visual loss.  There was visual loss as determined by Goldmann perimetry in 96% and by automated perimetry in 92%.  Contrast sensitivity testing was abnormal in 50% and Snellen acuity in 22%.  Two patients (4%) became blind in both eyes.  The Goldmann visual field grade improved in 60% of patients but visual function deteriorated in 5 (10%).  Deterioration of visual field grade was significantly associated only with weight gain during the year before diagnosis.  Visual loss in patients with IIH is common and is often reversible.  Patients should be evaluated by perimetry using an appropriate strategy and contrast sensitivity testing, along with careful examination of the optic discs.
Dual task performance and processing resources in normal subjects and patients with Parkinson's disease.  In recent years, there has been a growing consensus among investigators that the presence or absence of external cues guiding behaviour and attention is an important factor in determining whether or not deficits are found in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD).  In an earlier study, the authors suggested that the pattern of impaired and intact performance could be explained in terms of differential resource demands of the tasks, combined with depleted levels of central processing resources in PD patients.  Two experiments are reported, both employing dual-task paradigms.  The first assessed, in normal subjects, the relative processing demands of a cued and an uncued version of the Stroop task.  The results supported the proposal that the noncued task made greater demands on the subject's limited processing resources.  Further, performing a resource demanding secondary task concurrently with the Stroop test produced, in normal subjects, the same pattern of impaired performance as that reported previously in PD patients.  In the second experiment the same dual-task paradigm was employed with a group of PD patients and normal aged-matched controls.  Only the patients showed an increase in reaction time on the Stroop task when performing a resource demanding secondary task.  The patients also showed an interfering effect with concurrent foot tapping but not with an articulatory suppression task.  The results were taken to support the hypothesis that PD patients have depleted central processing resources.  In considering the present data, alternative explanations for the results are considered, in particular the possibility that they represent a deficit in switching processing resources between two tasks as the combined demands outweigh available resources.
Short-term memory and sentence comprehension. An investigation of a patient with crossed aphasia.  The relationship between short-term memory impairment and sentence comprehension is explored in a right-handed patient with a focal temporoparietal lesion of the right hemisphere.  The general clinical profile, as well as characteristics of the patient's immediate memory for word lists, suggests the occurrence of a 'mirror image' crossed aphasia.  Detailed analysis of the patient's ability to repeat and to comprehend sentences, however, indicates some important differences between this case and previously reported patients with short-term memory impairment.  It is suggested that these differences, which may be related to an unusual pattern of neuroanatomical organization of cognitive functions, involve symptom dissociations with implications for models of normal language/memory interactions.
Task-dependent variations in parkinsonian motor impairments.  Studies of visually-guided arm movements in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) have suggested a relationship between slowness of movement and a reduction in the ratio of movement amplitude and peak velocity.  Recent studies indicate, however, that PD impairments may be different for well-learned, natural movements performed without visual guidance, or movements associated with sequential motor behaviours such as speech.  To address this issue, PD subjects and age/sex-matched controls were compared on the performance of three tasks, all of which required lowering the jaw: (1) single, rapid, visually-guided movements; (2) equivalent movements associated with a single speech syllable (inherently without visual guidance), and (3) well-learned speech movements produced in a natural sequence.  PD subjects manifested similar deficits for visually-guided jaw lowering as those previously reported for arm movements, namely reduced velocity/amplitude ratios and increased movement durations.  By contrast, analogous jaw movements during the sequential speech tasks were unimpaired on these measures.  These results suggest that PD motor impairments are influenced by a variety of factors, including the degree to which tasks are familiar and natural, and the availability of visual information.
Effects of anticonvulsant treatment and low levels of folate and thiamine on amine metabolites in cerebrospinal fluid.  A total of 157 epileptic patients were studied with respect to (1) biogenic amine precursors and metabolites in the CSF, (2) levels of folate and thiamine in the blood and CSF, (3) length of treatment with phenytoin (PHT), (4) PHT intoxication, (5) CNS atrophy.  Alterations in CSF amine metabolite levels were related primarily to PHT intoxication, and low CSF folate and thiamine levels, but not to length of treatment or CNS atrophy.  PHT intoxication increased CSF 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5HIAA).  Low folate levels were associated with decreased CSF 5HIAA and homovanillic acid, while low thiamine levels were associated with decreased CSF 5HIAA and 3-methyoxy-4-hydroxyphenylethylene glycol.  It remains to be seen to what extent these alterations in biogenic amine metabolism, mediated by low CNS vitamin levels, also lead to deficits in cerebral function.
Human olfactory discrimination after unilateral frontal or temporal lobectomy.  Olfactory discrimination and detection was studied in 106 patients with unilateral cerebral excision in the right or left temporal lobe, right or left frontal lobe, left parietal lobe, or right frontal and temporal lobes, and in 20 normal control subjects.  Detection thresholds for n-butyl alcohol, measured separately in each nostril, did not differ across subject groups or across nostrils, thus excluding any primary sensory loss.  The discrimination task involved monorhinal presentation of repairs of unfamiliar odorants, which the subjects judged as same or different in quality.  The results showed a significant deficit in discrimination confined to the nostril ipsilateral to the lesion in patients with temporal lobe removals.  Patients with frontal lobe excisions were also impaired and, for patients with right frontal lesions including the orbital cortex, the impairment was found in both nostrils.  Patients with left parietal lesions did not demonstrate any significant deficits.  Normal subjects showed consistently better performance in the right than in the left nostril.  The results are interpreted as reflecting the importance of the orbitofrontal cortex in olfactory discrimination.  Temporal lobe lesions may disrupt the input to the orbitofrontal cortex, thereby producing poorer performance.  The nostril difference in the normal subjects, together with the birhinal impairment in patients with right orbitofrontal damage, suggest a relative advantage of the right orbital region in olfactory processing.
Sequencing in Parkinson's disease. Abnormalities in programming and controlling movement.  Central programming deficits in Parkinson's disease (PD) were studied in two reaction time (RT) experiments.  In Experiment 1, PD patients and controls performed sequences of hand postures that varied in length, the number of different postures (repetitive vs heterogeneous), and the delay interval before movement.  Before movement, the PD group planned repetitive movements like controls whereas for heterogeneous sequences RT increased less with sequence length for the PD group, implying less preprogramming.  The interresponse time (IRT) data from repetitive sequences showed that the PD group had difficulty controlling movement such that IRTs were faster when sequences were longer, thus allowing more time to schedule the termination of the sequence during the course of movement.  For heterogeneous sequences, the PD group made more errors and were slower than controls when changing hand postures, suggesting a deficit in switching between different responses.  While RT decreased with a longer delay similarly for both groups, IRT1 continued to improve only for the PD group but similarly for both types of sequences, suggesting a deficit specific to programming the first response.  In Experiment 2, subjects made decisions about the number of different hand postures contained within a sequence.  PD patients' decision times improved more with a longer delay only for heterogeneous sequences, suggesting a problem in identifying the number of different hand postures.  The results have implications for levels of motor dysfunction in PD which emphasize the influence of sequence length and complexity.
Pain control in the ambulatory elderly.  Pain control in the elderly, no matter what the etiology or setting, can be a major clinical challenge.  Aging causes unique physiologic changes, eg, a decreased perception of pain and an enhanced sensitivity to opioid analgesics.  Principles regarding evaluation of patients with pain are reviewed, including the use of an objective instrument for pain assessment from the viewpoint of both physician and patient.  Good pain control can be achieved with the nonopioids, such as acetaminophen and the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, the opioid analgesics, and, in some cases, adjuvant agents.  Discussed also are the concerns for patient addiction and the WHO Cancer Pain Relief program.
Plasticity of integrin expression by nerve-derived connective tissue cells. Human Schwann cells, perineurial cells, and fibroblasts express markedly different patterns of beta 1 integrins during nerve development, neoplasia, and in vitro.  Strikingly selective expression patterns of beta 1, alpha 2, alpha 3, and alpha 5 integrin subunits were revealed in endoneurium, perineurium, and epineurium of fetal and adult human peripheral nerve by immunostaining with specific antibodies.  The alpha 2 subunit was expressed only on Schwann cells both in fetal and adult nerve, whereas the alpha 3 epitopes were expressed exclusively in the adult tissue and were primarily present on perineurial cells.  The alpha 5 epitopes were expressed only on the innermost cell layer of perineurium of fetal and adult nerve.  The tumor cells within schwannomas and cutaneous neurofibromas expressed both alpha 2 and alpha 3 subunits, indicating that Schwann cells have the potential to express also the alpha 3 subunit in vivo.  Cell cultures established from human fetal nerve and neurofibromas revealed expression of the alpha 2 and alpha 5 epitopes on Schwann cells, perineurial cells, and fibroblasts, whereas only Schwann cells contained the alpha 3 epitopes which were occasionally concentrated on the adjacent Schwann cells at cell-cell contacts.  Our findings emphasize that nerve connective tissue cells change their profiles for expression of extracellular matrix receptors under conditions which have different regulatory control signals exerted by, for example, axons, humoral factors, or the extracellular matrix of the peripheral nerve.  This plasticity may play an important role during nerve development and in neoplastic processes affecting the connective tissue compartments of peripheral nerve.
Differential diagnosis of mut and cbl methylmalonic aciduria by DNA-mediated gene transfer in primary fibroblasts.  Methylmalonic aciduria can be caused by mutations in the gene encoding the methylmalonyl coenzyme A mutase apoenzyme (mut) or genes required for the provision of cofactor B12 (cbl).  The mut and cbl forms are classically differentiated by somatic cell complementation.  We describe a novel method for differential diagnosis of mut and cbl methylmalonic aciduria using DNA-mediated gene transfer of a methylmalonyl CoA mutase cDNA clone.  Gene transfer of a functional methylmalonyl CoA mutase cDNA clone into mut fibroblasts reconstitutes holoenzyme activity measured by metabolism of [14C]-propionate in culture.  Identical gene transfers into cbl fibroblasts have no effect.  This method is used for the differential diagnosis of mut and cbl genotypes in cells from patients with a clinical diagnosis of methylmalonic aciduria and is shown to be a facile, sensitive, and specific method for genetic diagnosis.  This work establishes the principle of using DNA-mediated gene transfer to identify the genotype of diseases which can result from mutations at several different genetic loci.  This type of differential genotypic diagnosis will be particularly important for establishing the applicability of somatic gene therapy in individual patients.
Modifying the translabyrinthine approach to preserve hearing during acoustic tumour surgery.  Removing an acoustic schwannoma using the translabyrinthine approach has previously been considered incompatible with hearing preservation.  By modifying the approach and preventing the loss of endolymph, we have successfully removed an intracanalicular acoustic schwannoma, which originated from the inferior vestibular nerve, and preserved hearing in the operated ear.  This report represents the preliminary findings using this particular technique in the management of an intracanalicular acoustic tumour.
Clinical features and associations of 560 cases of motor neuron disease.  In 560 cases of motor neuron disease, studied retrospectively from their case notes in three teaching centres, the age at onset ranged from 13 to 87 years (mean 56 years), and the mean duration of illness until death was 2.6 years.  In the subgroup of the disease presenting with progressive bulbar palsy presenting after age 59 years, there was a previously unrecognised excess of females sufficient to equalize the sex ratio of incidence of the disease in this age group.  No potentially causative clinical associations emerged; no relation was noted between occupational exposure to leather products, trauma or surgical procedures and the disease.  There was a trend for patients with motor neuron disease to give a history of abstention from alcohol.
Progressive degeneration of the right temporal lobe studied with positron emission tomography.  A 79 year old man with a twelve year progressive history of prosopagnosia and recent naming difficulty, in whom other intellectual skills were preserved, is described.  Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed an area of right temporal lobe hypometabolism, with an additional area of less severe hypometabolism at the left temporal pole.  This may represent an example of progressive focal cortical degeneration similar to that associated with primary progressive dysphasia, but affecting the right temporal lobe.
Cyclosporin-associated akinetic mutism and extrapyramidal syndrome after liver transplantation.  Three patients developed akinetic mutism on the third day after the introduction of intravenous cyclosporin A, given for immunosuppression after liver transplantation.  One patient in addition developed a florid orofacial dyskinesia, which resolved completely, as did the akinetic mutism, after withdrawal of cyclosporin.  In these patients the time course of the akinetic mutism and extrapyramidal syndrome, which developed in the absence of any other identifiable cause, suggests cyclosporin A was the precipitating factor.  Subsequently, two of the patients showed signs of pseudobulbar palsy with abnormalities in the pons on MRI scanning, suggesting central pontine myelinolysis (CPM).  None of the patients had experienced significant fluctuations in serum sodium or other risk factors for central pontine myelinolysis and the exact relationship to the earlier cyclosporin related mutism was not clear.
Grading white matter lesions on CT and MRI: a simple scale.  We developed and tested a simple three-point scale for grading white matter lesions in anterior and posterior regions of the brain.  Twenty four CT scans and 24 MRI scans were separately judged by 11 and five observers, respectively, on the presence and severity of white matter lesions.  The observers were radiologists and neurologists.  For CT scans, these periventricular changes were graded according to their extent as absent, or partly involving the white matter, or extending up to the subcortical region.  The MRI lesions were graded as no lesion or only a single one, multiple focal lesions, and multiple confluent lesions.  The pairwise agreements of all possible combinations of observers for each scan were corrected for chance (kappa statistics; maximal agreement 1.0).  The weighted kappa value, for anterior and posterior regions combined, was 0.63 for CT scans, and 0.78 for MRI scans.  This three-point scale for two separate regions seems suitable as a basis for cross-sectional or longitudinal studies of large series of patients.
The community hospital-based stroke programs in North Carolina, Oregon and New York--V. Stroke diagnosis: factors influencing the diagnostic evaluation of patients following acute stroke.  Among the 4129 patients of the Community Hospital-based Stroke Program, 30% had an unspecified stroke diagnosis.  Since specific diagnosis and, perhaps, eventual treatment, derives in part from diagnostic testing, we examined the effect of clinical condition, geographic and demographic factors on the incidence of certain diagnostic tests after acute stroke.  In this multivariable analysis, race, sex, history of hypertension and history of diabetes did not influence the chance of having any test, but older age strongly reduced the chances of receiving extensive evaluation.  When CT scanning was available, the utilization of a CT as well as other diagnostic studies including cerebral angiography, radionuclide brain scan, EEG and EKG was increased.  The odds of receiving a CT scan increased if the patient was married, and decreased with a history of previous stroke.  A history of previous TIA increased the chance of having a cerebral angiogram while a history of cardiac disease decreased the chance.  There were striking regional geographic differences in the use of CT, radionuclide brain scanning and cerebral angiography which may, in part, reflect differences between the availability of these technologies in urban and rural hospitals.  These results indicate that evaluation of stroke patients remains heterogenous.
Intrathecal baclofen for spasticity in cerebral palsy   Seventeen patients with congenital spastic cerebral palsy and six patients with other forms of spasticity were injected intrathecally with doses of placebo or baclofen, 25 micrograms, 50 micrograms, or 100 micrograms, in a randomized, double-blind manner.  Muscle tone in the upper and lower extremities was assessed by Ashworth scores both before the injections and every 2 hours afterward for 8 hours.  Function of the upper extremities was evaluated before the injections and 4 hours afterward.  Muscle tone in the lower extremities was significantly decreased within 2 hours after baclofen injection and remained lower than baseline 8 hours afterward.  Upper extremity tone and function were not significantly affected by these single doses.  Confusion and drowsiness occurred in two of the youngest children in the study after the 50-micrograms dose, but cleared within 2 hours.  Our findings indicate that intrathecal baclofen reduces spasticity in children with cerebral palsy, as it does in adults with spasticity of spinal origin.
No confirmation of visual evoked potential diagnostic test for migraine.  We have attempted to replicate the results of studies on a diagnostic test reported to have 90% sensitivity and 89-96% specificity for migraine.  The technique is based on peak-to-peak measurements of fast background electroencephalographic activity during a visual evoked potential (VEP) study.  VEP latencies and amplitudes did not differ significantly, and showed substantial overlap, between a group of eight migraine patients and ten age-matched healthy controls.  We could not recognise previously described fast activity or measure it objectively by peak-to-peak measurements.  We cannot confirm that measurement of fast wave activity in the VEP background is useful in diagnosis of migraine.
Abnormal pattern detected in fragile-X patients by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis.  The fragile-X syndrome is the most frequent inherited form of mental retardation, with an incidence of 1 in 1,500 males.  It is characterized by the presence of a fragile site at Xq27.3 induced in vitro by folate deprivation or by inhibitors of deoxynucleotide synthesis.  Its mode of inheritance is unusual for an X-linked trait, with incomplete penetrance in both males and females.  Some phenotypically normal males transmit the mutation to all their daughters who rarely express any symptoms, but penetrance is high in sons and daughters of these carrier women.  Genetic and physical mapping of the Xq27-q28 region has confirmed that the disease locus is located at or very near the fragile site.  Hypotheses proposed to account for the abnormalities in the inheritance of the disease include sequence rearrangements by meiotic recombination or a mutation that affects reactivation of an inactive X chromosome during differentiation of female germ cells.  To detect such rearrangements, or methylation changes that may reflect a locally inactive X chromosome, we used pulsed-field gel analysis of DNA from fragile-X patients with probes close to the fragile-X locus.  The probe Do33 (DXS465) detected abnormal patterns in fragile-X patients, but not in normal controls or in non-expressing male transmitters.
Lexical organization of nouns and verbs in the brain.  The analysis of neuropsychological disorders of lexical processing has provided important clues about the general organization of the lexical system and the internal structure of the processing components.  Reports of patients with selective dysfunction of specific semantic categories such as abstract versus concrete words, living things versus inanimate objects, animals, fruits and vegetables, proper names and so forth, support the hypothesis that the neural organization of the semantic processing component is organized in these categories.  There are reports of selective dysfunction of the grammatical categories noun and verb, suggesting that a dimension of lexical organization is the grammatical class of words.  But the results reported in these studies have not provided unambiguous evidence concerning two fundamental questions about the nature and the locus of this organization within the lexical system.  Is the noun-verb distinction represented in the semantic or in the phonological and orthographic lexicons? Is grammatical-class knowledge represented independently of lexical forms or is it represented separately and redundantly within each modality-specific lexicon? Here we report the performance of two brain-damaged subjects with modality-specific deficits restricted principally (H.W.) or virtually only (S.J.D) to verbs in oral and written production, respectively.  The contrasting performance suggests that grammatical-class distinctions are redundantly represented in the phonological and orthographic output lexical components.
The nature of opioid responsiveness and its implications for neuropathic pain: new hypotheses derived from studies of opioid infusions.  In recent years, the observation that the response of patients to opioid drugs may be influenced by properties inherent in the pain or pain syndrome, such as its pathophysiology, has evolved into the belief that certain types of pain, e.g., neuropathic pains, may be unresponsive to these drugs.  This concept has important implications for both clinical practice and basic understanding of opioid mechanisms.  We critically evaluate opioid responsiveness, particularly as it relates to neuropathic pain, and propose a clinically relevant definition and a paradigm for its investigation.  The paradigm is illustrated by analgesic responses to opioid infusion in 28 patients with neuropathic pains and by a detailed presentation of the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic relationships in one of these patients, whose central pain responded promptly to an infusion of hydromorphone.  From this analysis, we hypothesize that (1) opioid responsiveness in man can be defined by the degree of analgesia achieved during dose escalation to either intolerable side effects or the occurrence of 'complete' or 'adequate' analgesia; (2) opioid responsiveness is a continuum, rather than a quantal phenomenon; (3) opioid responsiveness is determined by a diverse group of patient characteristics and pain-related factors, as well as drug-selective effects; and (4) a neuropathic mechanism may reduce opioid responsiveness, but does not result in an inherent resistance to these drugs.  Given the complexity of factors contributing to opioid responsiveness and the observation that outcome cannot be reliably predicted, opioids should not be withheld on the assumption that pain mechanism, or any other factor, precludes a favorable response.  Both the clinical use of opioids and paradigms to investigate opioid responsiveness should include dose escalation to maximally tolerated levels and repeated monitoring of analgesia and other effects.
Pain 'memories' in phantom limbs: review and clinical observations.  This paper reviews reports of phantom limb sensations which resemble somatosensory events experienced in the limb before amputation.  It also presents descriptions of this phenomenon in 68 amputees who took part in a series of clinical studies.  These somatosensory memories are predominantly replicas of distressing pre-amputation lesions and pains which were experienced at or near the time of amputation, and are described as having the same qualities of sensation as the pre-amputation pain.  The patients who experience these pains emphasize that they are suffering real pain which they can describe in vivid detail, and insist that the experience is not merely a cognitive recollection of an earlier pain.  Reports of somatosensory memories are less common when there has been a discontinuity, or a pain-free interval, between the experience of pain and amputation.  Among the somatosensory memories reported are cutaneous lesions, deep tissue injuries, bone and joint pain and painful pre-amputation postures.  The experience of somatosensory memories does not appear to be related to the duration of pre-amputation pain, time since amputation, age, gender, prosthetic use, level of amputation, number of limbs amputated, or whether the amputation followed an accident or illness.  The results suggest that somatosensory inputs of sufficient intensity and duration can produce lasting changes in central neural structures which combine with cognitive-evaluative memories of the pre-amputation pain to give rise to the unified experience of a past pain referred to the phantom limb.  Implications for pre- and post-operative pain control are discussed.
Diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine and serious neurologic illness: an updated review of the epidemiologic evidence.  A widespread impression that DTP vaccine does cause brain damage has been based first on historical precedent--smallpox and rabies vaccines were recognized as sometimes causing devastating neurologic illness; analogy to pertussis--the disease can cause encephalopathy; and more recently on anecdotal evidence, particularly case series.  A noncausal relationship--coincidence--could explain the temporal relation between DTP vaccine and neurologic illness, inasmuch as DTP vaccine is given at the age of emergence of idiopathic neurologic disease.  The relationship between DTP vaccine and neurologic illness lacks specificity.  Case series have had an impact on both physicians' and the lay public's impression of the safety of pertussis vaccine greatly out of proportion to their scientific importance.  Case series can be useful for generating hypotheses but cannot provide evidence that pertussis vaccine is causally related to acute neurologic illness or brain damage.  Observational studies using cohort and ecologic designs did not find an association between DTP vaccine and serious neurologic illness, but they were not powerful enough to detect an association as rare as that observed by the NCES investigators.  The case-control design offers the best chance of providing causal evidence regarding DTP vaccine and serious neurologic illness.  The NCES is the only published case-control study of this issue.  This study found a rare association between DTP vaccine and some types of acute neurologic illness.  Bias and chance are unlikely to account entirely for the association demonstrated by the NCES.  However, the association has not yet been replicated by other case-control studies.  The NCES does not demonstrate that DTP vaccine causes permanent brain damage.
Can clinical judgment detect children with speech-language problems?  Pediatricians often rely on clinical judgment derived from observation or parental concern to identify children with developmental problems.  The less popular but recommended alternative is to repeatedly administer standardized screening tests.  Such tests are time consuming but, unlike clinical judgment, have known detection rates.  Preliminary research concerning clinical judgment showed that clusters of parental concerns related to their childrens' performances on screening tests.  In the present study, previous research was refined by assessment of the meaning of parents' concerns about their childrens' speech-language development.  In this study of 157 families seeking pediatric care, 72% of children whose speech-language screening yielded positive results had parents who were concerned about their speech-language development.  Of children with negative screening results, 83% had parents with no concerns about their speech-language development.  Although standardized screening tests should be used occasionally in the developmental surveillance process, the findings show that the problems of most children with developmental problems were detected through clinical judgment based on parental concern.
Pain management in the orthopedic patient.  Pain is a familiar phenomenon to all orthopedic nurses.  As Dunwoody said, "Few things we do for patients are more fundamental to the quality of life than relieving pain." We as orthopedic nurses are in a position to contribute to the positive management of pain by using a comprehensive approach to pain management that involves the participation of the patient.  We need to believe the patient's pain, try new approaches, and help our patients achieve pain relief.
Help for the hurting elderly. Safe use of drugs to relieve pain.  Pharmacologic management of pain in elderly patients is a common and difficult clinical problem.  Because of altered drug metabolism and pharmacodynamics in the elderly, the drugs of choice are different than in younger patients and side effects occur more often.  However, with judicious use and monitoring for toxicity, oral medications given as part of a multimodality approach can achieve adequate analgesia in most elderly patients.
Movement analysis--an aid to early diagnosis of cerebral palsy.  The purpose of this article is to review research related to the use of clinical analysis of movement as an aid to the early diagnosis of cerebral palsy.  A historical perspective of clinical techniques used by physicians and physical therapists in the early diagnosis of cerebral palsy will be presented first, including recent research findings on clinical signs that were most predictive of this movement disorder.  Predictive neuromotor behaviors common across several recent studies will be highlighted.  Future trends in the use of movement analysis, including digitized kinematic analysis of term and preterm infants and fetal ultrasound techniques, will be discussed as well.
Implications of a dynamical systems approach to understanding infant kicking behavior.  Implications of the dynamical systems approach to understanding movement dysfunction in infants are discussed.  Traditional theories of motor development attribute changes in movement to the hierarchical maturation of the central nervous system.  The dynamical systems approach emphasizes that movement self-organizes as the result of the interaction of the participating subsystems in developmental and real time.  In this article, I discuss, from the theoretical perspective of the dynamical systems approach, the organization of leg movements in low- and high-risk preterm and full-term infants, developmental changes in movement in low-risk preterm infants from 34 weeks' gestational age to 40 weeks' postgestational age, and differences in movement between low-risk preterm infants at 40 weeks' postgestational age and full-term infants.  Preliminary data on high-risk preterm infants are presented.  Based on these data, the necessity to review and reinterpret traditional concepts of motor development is explored.  Suggestions are offered and questions posed on how the dynamical systems perspective may influence the practice of physical therapy in the evaluation, and treatment of infants at risk for movement dysfunction.
Cognitive strategies during coincident timing tasks.  Research findings suggest that experience and cognitive strategies contribute to successful performance during perceptual-motor tasks.  This article critically reviews selected literature on the effects of information-processing skills, preferred movement time, experience, and task difficulty on performance during coincident timing tasks.  Theoretical information and research findings are discussed, and their applications to clinical practice are considered.  Clinical recommendations include assessment of coincident timing skills and use of functional activities that provide opportunities to explore and dynamically interact with the environment.
Measurement and treatment in cerebral palsy: an argument for a new approach.  This article describes the need for a shift in our therapeutic strategies for patients with cerebral palsy.  Changes in functional abilities must be stressed in therapy.  Coincident with this emphasis must be the development of functional assessments to be used when documenting intervention outcomes.  Research on functional arm movement using kinematic analysis is described for this patient group.
Dorsal rhizotomy for children with cerebral palsy: support for concepts of motor control.  The results from selective dorsal rhizotomy research suggest that therapists need to question some common clinical assumptions about movement dysfunction.  The rationale for performing a selective dorsal rhizotomy is based on the clinical assumptions that spasticity is the underlying cause of disordered movement and that reducing or eliminating the spasticity will improve movement.  This article reviews the literature related to movement dysfunction, the effects of selective dorsal rhizotomy, and the evidence for disordered motor control in children with spastic cerebral palsy.  Selective dorsal rhizotomy appears to reduce spasticity and increase joint range of motion.  Abnormal movement patterns, however, persist after the spasticity is reduced.  Well-coordinated movement patterns are acquired slowly and appear to be related to an intense period of physical therapy.  I argue that these results provide evidence that the presence of spasticity alone is an insufficient explanation for abnormal movement patterns.  I propose that physical therapists redirect their efforts from developing methods for reducing spasticity to developing adequate assessment, treatment, and measurement techniques for assessing motor control in children with cerebral palsy.  I believe we can maximize the functional potential of children with cerebral palsy by identifying problems related to motor control and applying sound principles of motor learning to treatment.
Cerebellar degeneration and Meige's syndrome.  We have reported a case of Meige's syndrome in a middle-aged man who eventually had a cerebellar degeneration syndrome.  The extrapyramidal symptoms preceded cerebellar signs and symptoms by 5 years.  Most patients with idiopathic Meige's syndrome show some improvement with high-dose anticholinergic therapy.  Our patient's lack of response to such agents and his subsequent cerebellar symptoms are reminiscent of the situation seen with parkinsonian patients who do not respond to medications, indicating a more widespread degenerative disease.  The association of extrapyramidal symptoms with some spinocerebellar disorders, and the pathologic changes seen in the one reported autopsy case, should place the group of spinocerebellar disorders high on the differential list.
Experience with surgical treatment of Takayasu's disease.  We reviewed 28 patients with Takayasu's disease to determine the incidence of stroke and its relationship to the involvement of the thoracic aortic arch and its branches.  We describe surgical experiences with 10 of the 28 patients who required 21 vascular surgical procedures for critical thoracic aortic arch arterial stenoses, upper and lower extremity ischemia, and renal artery stenoses.  Four of the 28 patients initially had a stroke caused by occlusion of one or more thoracic aortic arch arteries.  Six of the 10 patients underwent 7 bypass procedures for critical thoracic arch stenoses.  All have remained free of stroke for 5 or more years.  Four patients had five anastomotic stenoses or graft occlusions in late follow-up; the development of these stenoses did not relate to disease activity at the time of the operative procedure.  All bypass grafts originating from the subclavian axillary artery developed anastomotic stenoses; no anastomotic stenoses occurred in bypass grafts originating from the ascending aorta.  In contrast to other reports, no anastomotic false aneurysms occurred.  Occlusions of major aortic arch arteries in Takayasu's disease cause stroke.  Bypass of critically stenoses aortic arch arteries protects against stroke and is best performed with grafts originating from the ascending aorta.  Anastomotic stenoses but not anastomotic aneurysms are common.  This study suggests that aggressive surgical treatment can be performed with good results.
Murine retroviral neurovirulence correlates with an enhanced ability ofvirus to infect selectively, replicate in, and activate resident microglial cells [published erratum appears in Am J Pathol 1991 May;138(5):1058]  To determine the biologic basis of ts1 MoMuLV neurovirulence in vivo, newborn CFW/D mice were inoculated with neurovirulent ts1 MoMuLV and nonneurovirulent wt MoMuLV and the temporal response to virus infection in the central nervous system (CNS), spleen, and thymus was studied comparatively.  Experimental procedures included single and double labeling in situ immunohistochemistry with selective morphometric analyses, and steady state immunoblotting of viral proteins.  Cellular targets for virus infection were identical for both ts1 and wt MoMuLV and consisted sequentially of 1) splenic megakaryocytes, 2) splenic and thymic lymphocytes, 3) CNS capillary endothelial cells, and 4) CNS pericytes and microglia.  Resident microglial cells served as the major reservor and amplifier of virus infection in the CNS of ts1 MoMuLV-infected mice; a similar but much less significant role was played by microglia in wt MoMuLV-infected mice.  The genesis and progression of severe spongiform lesions in ts1 MoMuLV-infected mice were both temporally and spatially correlated with amplified virus infection of microglia, and hyperplasia and hypertrophy of both virus-infected and nonvirus-infected microglial cells.  Direct virus infection of neurons was never observed.  The development of clinical neurologic disease and spongiform lesions in ts1 MoMuLV-infected mice correlated with the accumulation of both viral gag and env gene products in the CNS; there was no selective accumulation of env precursor polyprotein Pr80env.  When compared to wt MoMuLV-infected mice, the neurovirulence of ts1 MoMuLV-infected mice occurred by an enhanced ability to replicate in the CNS and to infect and activate more microglia, rather than by a fundamental change in cellular tropism or topography of virus infection.
Secondary deposition of beta amyloid within extracellular neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer-type dementia.  The hippocampal areas of 34 autopsy specimen brains from aged demented and nondemented subjects were examined using double staining of Bodian and beta protein.  In 18 cases (75.5 +/- 7.4 years old), none of the extracellular neurofibrillary tangles (E-NFTs) were immunoreactive with beta protein.  In 16 cases (82.9 +/- 5.4 years old), the minority of E-NFTs were immunoreactive with beta-protein antiserum.  These beta-immunoreactive E-NFTs frequently appeared in the areas having senile plaques, while they were not observed in the area lacking beta-immunoreactive senile plaques.  The ultrastructure of beta-immunoreactive E-NFTs revealed that they consisted of extracellular amyloid fibrils, extracellularly located bundles of paired helical filaments, astroglial processes and degenerating neurites.  These findings suggest that the beta immunoreactivity of E-NFTs comes from secondary deposition of amyloid fibrils.
The induction dose of propofol in infants 1-6 months of age and in children 10-16 years of age.  The propofol dose needed for satisfactory induction of anesthesia was determined in 22 infants 1-6 months of age and 22 children 10-16 yr of age.  A single bolus of propofol was given over 10 s.  Thirty seconds after injection the lid reflex was tested and the anesthesia mask was applied.  The patient was considered to be asleep if there were no gross movements during the next 30 s while the patient breathed O2.  The dose required for satisfactory induction in 50% of patients (ED50) (+/- SE) was 3.0 +/- 0.2 mg/kg in infants and 2.4 +/- 0.1 mg/kg in older children (P less than 0.02).  Pain on injection occurred in 50% of the infants and 18% of the children.
Cause of death in an emergency department   A retrospective review was done of 601 consecutive emergency department deaths.  Nontrauma causes accounted for 77% of the deaths and this group had an average age of 64 years and a male to female ratio of 1.9:1.  Trauma caused 23% of the fatalities and this group had a younger average age of 29 years and a male to female ratio of 4.6:1.  The most common causes of nontrauma death were sudden death of uncertain cause (34%), coronary artery disease (34%), cancer (5%), other heart disease (4%), chronic obstructive lung disease (3%), drug overdose (3%), and sudden infant death syndrome (2%).  The most common causes of trauma death were motor vehicle accidents (61%) and gunshot wounds (16%).  The overall autopsy rate was 40%.  Death certificates were often in error.
Efficacy of potassium and magnesium in essential hypertension: a double-blind, placebo controlled, crossover study   OBJECTIVE--To evaluate the antihypertensive activity of potassium given alone or in combination with magnesium in patients with mild hypertension.  DESIGN--A double blind, randomised, placebo controlled, crossover trial of 32 weeks' duration.  SETTINGS--Cardiology outpatient department, Sassoon General Hospitals, Pune, India.  PATIENTS--37 Adults with mild hypertension (diastolic blood pressure less than 110 mm Hg).  INTERVENTION--Patients received either placebo or potassium 60 mmol/day alone or in combination with magnesium 20 mmol/day in a crossover design.  No other drug treatment was allowed.  MEASUREMENTS--Blood pressure and heart rate assessed at weekly intervals and biochemical parameters at monthly intervals.  RESULTS--Potassium alone or in combination with magnesium produced a significant reduction in systolic and diastolic blood pressures (p less than 0.001) and a significant reduction in serum cholesterol concentration (p less than 0.05); other biochemical variables did not change.  Magnesium did not have an additional effect.  Urinary potassium excretion increased significantly in the groups who received potassium alone or in combination with magnesium.  The drug was well tolerated and compliance was satisfactory.  CONCLUSION--Potassium 60 mmol/day lowers arterial blood pressure in patients with mild hypertension.  Giving magnesium as well has no added advantage.
Resympathectomy of the upper extremity.  Resympathectomy was performed in 27 patients (eight bilaterally) with ischaemic hand phenomena.  An extended operative technique, resecting parts of the second and third intercostal nerves and their surrounding tissue, was used.  In all 35 procedures the posterior extrapleural approach was used.  Follow-up was from 3 to 12 years.  Only the sympathetic ganglia had been removed during the previous surgery by the axillary approach (67 per cent of these patients had had a transient response for between 6 months and 2 years; 33 per cent had had no response at all).  A direct subjective improvement was seen after 27 of the 35 reoperations (77 per cent).  In 14 patients continuous wave Doppler ultrasound studies were available and showed a significant increase in peak forward frequency after operation (P less than 0.001).  From these data it may be concluded that it is possible to obtain a resympathectomy effect, but reoperation should be reserved for special cases for whom survival of digits is essential.
Oscillometric finger blood pressure versus brachial auscultative blood pressure recording.  In this study, a recently marketed proprietary finger blood pressure monitor, the Marshall, Astro F-88, was compared with the standard auscultative brachial mercury sphygmomanometer on 125 subjects.  Measurements were undertaken according to the standards set by the American Heart Association.  Sensitivity of the finger blood pressure measurement was 76% for systolic and 75% for diastolic blood pressure in diagnosis of high blood pressure (systolic greater than 140 mm Hg and diastolic greater than 90 mm Hg).  Specificity was 86% for systolic and 82% for diastolic blood pressure.  Positive predictive values were 58% for systolic and 38% for diastolic blood pressure in the study population in which prevalence of hypertension was 12%.  The correlation coefficient (Pearson) for systolic values between devices was 0.76 (P less than .0001) and 0.57 (P less than .0001) for diastolic pressure.  Values obtained by the finger monitor were found to be higher than those obtained by the mercury sphygmomanometer.  Mean differences and standard deviations (paired t test) for systolic and diastolic pressures between the two devices were 2.3 +/- 14.9 mm Hg (P less than .08) and 2.9 +/- 14.5 mm Hg (P less than .02), respectively.  These values are not in accordance with the proposed national standards because only 48% of the systolic and 37% of the diastolic blood pressure measurements were within 5 mm Hg of the mercury sphygmomanometer measurements.  Therefore, although these differences may well be due to different techniques of monitoring employed by the devices, this device is not recommended for evaluation of blood pressure.
The leukocyte count: a predictor of hypertension.  In an exploratory study of 1031 persons observed to progress from normotension to essential hypertension and 1031 matched subjects who remained normotensive, the initial leukocyte count (WBC) was found to be related to the development of hypertension, with risk increased 40% (95% confidence interval 12-82%) in persons in the highest as compared to the lowest quartile of WBC.  This relationship proved to be largely independent of body mass index, body fat distribution, alcohol and tobacco consumption, and parental history of hypertension.  An increased WBC may reflect greater sympathetic tone or may directly increase peripheral vascular resistance by impeding circulation through small blood vessels.  If confirmed, this study adds another condition to the growing list for which the WBC is predictive.  This simple, cheap test should be considered for inclusion in prospective epidemiological studies of many different diseases.
Plasma fibrinogen and coronary risk factors: the Scottish Heart Health Study.  Plasma fibrinogen was measured in a sample of 8824 men and women aged 40-59 years participating in the Scottish Heart Health Study, and related to cardiovascular risk factors.  Women had higher fibrinogen levels than men.  In both sexes, multivariate analysis showed that fibrinogen was positively associated with age, smoking, total cholesterol and body mass index and negatively associated with alcohol consumption.  Among women, early menopause and systolic blood pressure were also associated with fibrinogen levels.  Univariate analyses showed weak positive associations with fish consumption for both sexes although only male white fish consumption entered the final model.  Women with a history of contraceptive pill usage had significantly lower fibrinogen levels.  The relationship between fibrinogen and physical activity was complex, and could largely be explained by smoking.  These findings support the hypothesis that raised fibrinogen is one mechanism by which several major risk factors may promote coronary heart disease.  However, known risk factors explained, at most, 10% of the total variance in fibrinogen levels among the general population.
The effects of generation and gender on the joint distributions of lipid and apolipoprotein phenotypes in the population at large.  The generation and gender effects on the joint distributions of total plasma cholesterol (Total-C), ln triglycerides (lnTrig), HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C), LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C), apolipoproteins AI (Apo AI), AII (Apo AII), and E (lnApo E) were studied in 184 male grandparents (MGP), 242 female grandparents (FGP), 237 male parents (MP), 235 female parents (FP), 202 male children (MC), and 200 female children (FC).  Homogeneity of variance tests revealed that lipid variances were gender and/or generation specific while apolipoprotein variances were homogeneous across strata.  In the absence of heterogeneity of variance, significant heterogeneity in LDL:lnTrig and lnTrig:Apo AII covariation was found between genders in the parental generation.  In the presence of heterogeneity of variance, significant heterogeneity of correlation between genders and/or across generations was found for the HDL-C:LDL-C, Total-C:LDL-C, Total-C:lnTrig, lnTrig:LDL-C, Total-C:lnApo E and HDL-C:lnApo E bivariate distributions.  Analyses of principal components revealed that the generation and gender specific cohorts have similar eigenvalues but distinct eigenvectors for the first two principal components underlying the seven dimensional lipid and apolipoprotein distribution.  We conclude that the amount of variability explained by the first two principal components is the same across cohorts but how the interindividual variability is distributed among the lipid and apolipoprotein traits is generation and gender specific.  This study documents the role that variance and covariance might play in determining risk of disease for special subgroups of the population at large.  It also demonstrates how variances and covariances between risk factors traits characterize life processes of aging and sexual dimorphism.  This study argues that future biometrical genetic and epidemiological studies of coronary artery disease must take into account age and gender effects on interindividual variability and covariability of risk factors.
Risk ratios and risk differences in estimating the effect of risk factors for cardiovascular disease in the elderly.  This article reviews the nature of the effects of hypertension, smoking and cholesterol on the incidence of cardiovascular disease and emphasizes how these effects vary by age.  In the Methods section, we discuss briefly the concepts of additive and multiplicative statistical models as tools for summarizing data.  In the results section, we summarize available data on the association between incident stroke and coronary heart disease in the elderly and each of these major risk factors.  The traditional multiplicative model parsimoniously characterizes the individual and joint effects of age and high blood pressure in terms of risk ratios; but, for smoking and cholesterol, an additive model appears to be the most parsimonious.  We discuss the consequences of these observations for the study and prevention of cardiovascular disease in the elderly.
Significance of fill-in after thallium-201 reinjection following delayed imaging: comparison with regional wall motion and angiographic findings   To identify reversible defects, reinjection of a small amount of thallium-201 (201Tl) following 3-hr delayed imaging was performed in 60 patients with coronary artery disease who had perfusion abnormalities on their post-exercise 201Tl images.  Thallium-201 uptake was visually scored and judged as normal (Group 1), reversible defect (Group II), new fill-in after reinjection (Group IIIa) and no fill-in even after reinjection (Group IIIb).  New fill-in after reinjection was observed in 27 segments of the 85 segments (32%), showing persistent defect on the stress and delayed images.  The wall motion in Group IIIa was worse than Group II but better than Group IIIb.  Group IIIa showed Q-wave on ECG more often (69%) than Group II (27%) (p less than 0.01), but less often than Group IIIb (85%) (p less than 0.05).  These data indicate that the reinjection 201Tl imaging often identifies new fill-in in the areas of no redistribution on the delayed images and it may hold promise for assessing tissue viability which the conventional imaging may underestimate.
Effects of long-term coenzyme Q10 and captopril treatment on survival and functional capacity in rats with experimentally induced heart infarction.  The effects of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ) and captopril on functional capacity, hemodynamics and survival were studied in 154 rats that recovered after experimental myocardial infarction.  Rats were randomized into four groups receiving either CoQ, captopril, a combination of the two drugs or 1 ml of tap water once daily for 12 weeks from the day of coronary artery ligation.  CoQ as well as captopril and the combined treatment significantly improved exercise capacity as evaluated by lactate production during a standardized treadmill exercise test.  No significant changes in heart rate or mean blood pressure were observed during the study in the captopril-treated group.  CoQ treatment increased the maximum heart rate significantly, whereas no effect on mean blood pressure was observed.  Both captopril and CoQ decreased pulmonary congestion.  Furthermore, the data may suggest that captopril prevents right ventricular hypertrophy seen in placebo-treated rats with large infarcts.  This was not observed after CoQ treatment.  Captopril treatment improved 3-month probability of survival (93%) as compared with placebo (74%) (P less than .05).  CoQ and the combined treatment tended to improve survival, but this was, however, not statistically significant.
How ancient is temporal arteritis?  Realism is one of the characteristics of Amarnian art; some details of The Harpist represented in the tomb of Pa-Aton-Em-Heb (1350 BC, 18th Dynasty) might gives clues to a diagnosis: the eyes are closed with swollen lids, and the harpist appears to stare into space; he is round shouldered with a very wasted face, his temporal ara is heightened and hollowed by a broken line joining the extremity of the eyebrow with the corner of the eye.  These details are not found elsewhere.  Did the harpist's blindness result from temporal arteritis associated to polymyalgia rheumatica?.
Propagation of deep venous thrombosis identified by duplex ultrasonography.  To investigate the efficacy of anticoagulation in preventing continuing thrombosis, we prospectively evaluated 24 patients with acute deep venous thrombosis using duplex ultrasonography.  All patients were hospitalized with conclusive ultrasonic evidence of deep venous thrombosis identified in one of four levels: I, calf only; II, calf-popliteal; III, calf-popliteal-femoral; or IV, calf-popliteal-femoral-iliac.  Duplex scans were obtained on admission and on three subsequent occasions during therapy.  Progression of thrombosis was defined as advancement of thrombus to the more proximal venous level.  Demographic data, symptoms, risk factors for deep venous thrombosis, physical findings, anticoagulation regimens, and hematologic variables were ascertained.  Adequacy of anticoagulation was defined as elevation of baseline activated partial thromboplastin time by 150%.  Nine patients (38%) had progression of thrombosis, and 15 (62%) had stable or improving duplex scans.  Progression occurred as follows: I----II (2), I----III (2), II----III (1), and III----IV (4).  Of the demographic and clinical variables examined, only smoking correlated with progression of thrombus (p = 0.04).  Average heparin dose in the stable group was 1214 +/- 294 units/hr and 1122 +/- 248 units/hr in the group that progressed (p = 0.8): activated partial thromboplastin time was 45.6 +/- 7 seconds in the stable group and 49.8 +/- 9 seconds in the progression group (p = 0.7).  Nine patients in the stable group had consistently adequate anticoagulation, whereas six did not; six in the progression group were consistently anticoagulated, and three were not.  Two patients (one with stable thrombus and one with progressive thrombus) suffered nonfatal pulmonary emboli.  Clot progression as determined by duplex scanning did not predict acute complications of deep venous thrombosis.
Clinical spectrum of symptomatic external iliac fibromuscular dysplasia.  External iliac fibromuscular dysplasia is a rare and usually asymptomatic disorder.  We report eight symptomatic patients seen over a 15-year period and review pathophysiologic mechanisms accounting for the three following distinct lower extremity ischemic sequelae: (1) Emboli--episodic focal digital ischemia (blue toe) was seen in three patients.  Resection and primary anastomosis of focal iliac ulcerative fibromuscular dysplasia (one patient) or resection and replacement (two patients) removed the embolic source and relieved the symptoms.  (2) Chronic ischemia--gradual onset of full leg claudication in four patients was treated by operative graduated intraluminal dilation in three patients and prosthetic bypass in one.  Arteriography subsequently showed a remodeled lumen in the three patients who underwent dilation.  (3) Dissection--acute onset leg ischemia resulted from presumed dissection of the external iliac segment.  After 4 months of conservative management of antiplatelet agents and exercise, symptoms resolved completely, and arteriogram showed spontaneous restoration of a normal lumen in the dissected segment.  The clinical presentation of fibromuscular dysplasia may mimic other arterial processes such as atherosclerosis.  Diagnosis is made only by arteriography with specific magnification views of the external iliac arteries and careful surveillance of the renal arteries.  Appropriate treatment should be tailored to the clinical presenting symptom.  For microembolic disease, resection and replacement are required.  For chronic ischemia, intraluminal dilation is generally sufficient and durable and has proved to be a simpler and acceptable alternative to replacement or bypass.  In acute dissection, surgical intervention may be deferred if the limb is viable to allow spontaneous healing and remodeling.  Persistent symptoms may be the only indication for intervention in this ischemic manifestation of external iliac fibromuscular dysplasia.
Initial clinical evaluation of carotid artery laser endarterectomy.  Clinical study of carotid artery laser endarterectomy began April 15, 1988.  This report describes the first 10 cases that were performed in nine patients (five men and four women, mean age 70 years).  Indications were asymptomatic stenosis (5), transient ischemic attacks (4), and stroke in evolution (1).  There were two emergency cases and eight elective cases (including one reoperative case).  Surgical exposure, systemic heparinization, vascular control, and a longitudinal arteriotomy were used.  The cleavage plane between atheromas and media was developed with argon ion laser radiation (488 and 514.5 nm) directed through a 300 microns quartz fiber at power 1.0 W.  Laser radiation was used to cut the atheromas out of the arteries and weld the end points.  Residual atheromatous debris were vaporized with individual laser exposures.  Arteriotomies were closed with sutures, and blood flow was restored.  The endarterectomies were 3.9 +/- 1.1 cm long and required 330 +/- 97 joules.  Mean clamp time was 22.5 +/- 7.9 minutes.  Shunts were used in two cases.  There were no arterial perforations or injuries as a result of laser light.  Complications were hematoma (1), respiratory arrest (1), and transient neurologic deficit (1).  Carotid endarterectomy is technically feasible with argon ion laser radiation.  In the present series, postoperative observations, averaging 12 months and ranging from 5 to 19 months, have shown satisfactory results.  No angiographic follow-up examinations were carried out.
The influence of extracorporeal circulation on erythrocytes and flow properties of blood.  The influence of extracorporeal circulation on red blood cells and flow properties of blood was studied in 10 patients undergoing aorta-coronary bypass grafting.  Blood samples were drawn on admission, under general anesthesia before the operation, during extracorporeal circulation, immediately after extracorporeal circulation, and 24 hours after extracorporeal circulation.  Echinocytes were found during and shortly after extracorporeal circulation, but disappeared within 24 hours.  Washing the cells in buffer restored the normal discocytic shape, which indicated that a plasma factor was responsible.  Red cell membrane lipids were not affected.  Analysis of the membrane proteins revealed a decrease of ankyrin after extracorporeal circulation, which was prevented by protease inhibitors during preparation.  This suggests an increased proteolytic activity of the plasma after extracorporeal circulation.  Red cell deformability was not altered.  Plasma viscosity and hematocrit were markedly reduced by hemodilution with the priming solution.  Their low levels resulted in a low blood viscosity during extracorporeal circulation, which was even lower at 26 degrees C than before or after the operation at 37 degrees C.  We conclude that the red cell is affected by extracorporeal circulation.  The flow properties of blood, however, are not impaired, but are improved by hemodilution.
Prostacyclin and prostaglandin E2 mediate reduction of increased mean arterial pressure during cardiopulmonary bypass by aspiration of shed pulmonary venous blood.  Increased mean arterial pressure during the aortic crossclamp period while on cardiopulmonary bypass was usually treated by us with hypotensive drugs.  We noticed, however, that aspirating shed excess pulmonary venous blood from the open pleural cavities causes an immediate reduction in mean arterial pressure, obviating the need for any further pharmaceutical intervention.  In this study we investigated the relationship between the reduction in mean arterial pressure and the levels of prostacyclin and prostaglandin E2 in the peripheral and pulmonary venous blood.  Ten men undergoing coronary bypass operations had 21 episodes of increased mean arterial pressure (106.9 +/- 11.4 mm Hg) during aortic crossclamping, which was reduced to 67.4 +/- 11.4 mm Hg (p less than 0.001) only by aspirating a mean of 490 ml (range 150 to 1100 ml) of pulmonary venous blood from the pleurae back into the circulation.  Mean peripheral prostacyclin level, measured as 6-keto-prostaglandin F1 alpha, and prostaglandin E2 level, both measured by radioimmunoassay technique, were significantly lower at peak mean arterial pressure (419 +/- 180 and 59.5 +/- 21.2 pg/ml) than at lowest mean arterial pressure (632 +/- 271 and 96.7 +/- 52.4 pg/ml for 6-keto-prostaglandin F1 alpha and prostaglandin E2, respectively; p less than 0.001).  Prostaglandin F1 alpha and prostaglandin E2 levels in the aspirated pulmonary venous blood were 2309 +/- 3098 pg/ml and 749 +/- 909 pg/ml, respectively.  The hypotensive effect of shed pulmonary venous blood that is aspirated back from the pleurae into the circulation seems to be mediated by the high levels of prostacyclin and prostaglandin E2, both powerful vasodilators.
Myocardial temperature during cardiac operations: influence on right ventricular function.  Maintenance of right heart integrity is frequently neglected during coronary operations.  Right ventricular dysfunction sometimes limits the success of the surgical procedure, however.  In addition to the use of cardioplegic solutions, myocardial hypothermia during ischemic cardiac arrest seems to be an important factor for guaranteeing right ventricular performance thereafter.  This study was designed to measure myocardial temperature in patients with coronary artery disease who have significant stenosis of the right coronary artery in comparison with those who do not have stenosis of the right coronary artery and to evaluate the influence of myocardial temperature on right ventricular hemodynamics after cardiopulmonary bypass.  Right ventricular function was assessed by thermodilution technique, which allows measurement of right ventricular ejection fraction, right ventricular end-diastolic volume, and right ventricular end-systolic volume.  Right ventricular temperature differed significantly between the two groups, with the lowest value of 15.1 degrees +/- 1.8 degrees C in the group without stenosis of the right coronary artery and a value of 22.2 degrees +/- 2.1 degrees C in the group with stenosis of the right coronary artery.  Left ventricular and septal temperatures were without group differences within the investigation period.  Right ventricular hemodynamics were impaired only in the group with stenosis of the right coronary artery with a decrease in right ventricular ejection fraction from 44.2% to 34.1% immediately after termination of bypass and an increase in right ventricular end-diastolic volume index (+38%) and right ventricular end-systolic volume index (+70%).  Cardiac index decreased only in this group, too (-22.5%).  Analysis of covariance revealed a significant correlation only between changes in right ventricular ejection fraction, right ventricular end-diastolic volume, and right ventricular end-systolic volume and the course of right myocardial temperature.  It is concluded that right ventricular hypothermia is more difficult to achieve in patients with a diseased right coronary artery.  Constant myocardial hypothermia, however, seems to be important in guaranteeing right ventricular function, which easily can be evaluated by the thermodilution technique.
Intraoperative coronary artery endarterectomy with excimer laser.  Compared with continuous-wave lasers, excimer lasers exhibit several in vitro advantages: nonthermal ablation process and linear relation between the number of pulses and the depth of the crater.  A 308 nm, 20 nsec pulse duration, 1 to 5 repetition rate laser was specifically designed for clinical application.  At the time of cardiopulmonary bypass in 10 symptomatic patients, before bypass grafting, a 1 mm diameter core specifically ultraviolet-tipped fiberoptic scope was introduced via the coronary arteriotomy and placed upstream (seven patients) and downstream (three patients) in contact with the stenosis.  Laser power was increasingly delivered up to the clearing of the stenosis or occlusion.  Quality of angioplasty was controlled by calibration of the neolumen, cardioplegic solution output through the laser-treated segment, and an eighth day or sixth month coronary arteriogram.  In the first three patients studied on the eighth day, all laser-treated coronary artery segments showed an early parallel-linked patent neolumen despite competitive bypass graft flow.  In the patients studied after 6 months, all recanalized segments were patent except one; in one patient the venous graft was occluded, but the upstream laser angioplasty was patent.  The main limitation of the method lies in the fact that laser coronary recanalization is confined to the fiber core diameter.  We conclude that (1) excimer laser angioplasty may be safe and efficient during surgical procedure and (2) as catheter flexibility remains the most critical problem, we are now assuming an appropriate tool with a multifiber system that is suitable for intraoperative as well as percutaneous routes.
Risk of myocardial infarction and death during treatment with low dose aspirin and intravenous heparin in men with unstable coronary artery disease. The RISC Group   796 men with unstable coronary artery disease (unstable angina or non-Q-wave myocardial infarction [MI] ), were randomised to double-blind placebo-controlled treatment with oral aspirin 75 mg/day and/or 5 days of intermittent intravenous heparin.  The risk of MI and death was reduced by aspirin.  After 5 days the risk ratio was 0.43 (confidence intervals, 0.21-0.91), at 1 month 0.31 (0.18-0.53), and at 3 months 0.36 (0.23-0.57).  Aspirin reduced event rate in non-Q-wave MI and unstable angina, independently of electrocardiographic abnormalities or concurrent drug therapy.  Heparin had no significant influence on event rate, although the group treated with aspirin and heparin had the lowest number of events during the initial 5 days.  Treatment had few side-effects and high patient compliance.
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease   BACKGROUND.  A high incidence of hypertension (50 to 75 percent) occurs early in the course of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease.  Cyst enlargement, causing bilateral renal ischemia and subsequent release of renin, is proposed as the cause of this form of hypertension.  METHODS.  To investigate this hypothesis, we measured plasma renin activity and aldosterone concentrations during short-term and long-term converting-enzyme inhibition in 14 patients with hypertension due to polycystic kidney disease, 9 patients with essential hypertension, 11 normotensive patients with polycystic kidney disease, and 13 normal subjects.  The groups were comparable with respect to age, sex, body-surface area, degree of hypertension, sodium excretion, and renal function.  RESULTS.  During the short-term study, the mean (+/- SE) plasma renin activity was significantly higher in the hypertensive patients with polycystic kidney disease than in the patients with essential hypertension, in the supine (0.36 +/- 0.06 vs.  0.22 +/- 0.06 ng per liter.second, P = 0.05) and upright positions (1.03 +/- 0.14 vs.  0.61 +/- 0.08 ng per liter.second, P less than 0.03) and after converting-enzyme inhibition (1.97 +/- 0.28 vs.  0.67 +/- 0.17 ng per liter.second, P less than 0.0006).  The mean arterial pressures measured in the supine and upright positions and the plasma aldosterone concentrations measured in the upright position were significantly higher in the normotensive patients with polycystic kidney disease than in the normal subjects.  After six weeks of converting-enzyme inhibition, renal plasma flow increased (P less than 0.005), and both renal vascular resistance (P less than 0.007) and the filtration fraction (P less than 0.02) decreased significantly in the hypertensive patients with polycystic kidney disease but not in the patients with essential hypertension.  CONCLUSIONS.  The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is stimulated significantly more in hypertensive patients with polycystic kidney disease than in comparable patients with essential hypertension.  The increased renin release, perhaps due to renal ischemia caused by cyst expansion, probably contributes to the early development of hypertension in polycystic kidney disease.
Predicting the appropriate use of carotid endarterectomy, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, and coronary angiography   BACKGROUND AND METHODS.  In a nationally representative population 65 years of age or older, we have demonstrated that about one quarter of coronary angiographies and upper gastrointestinal endoscopies and two thirds of carotid endarterectomies were performed for reasons that were less than medically appropriate.  In this paper we examine whether specific characteristics of patients (age, sex, and race), physicians (age, board-certification status, and experience with the procedure), or hospitals (teaching status, profit-making status, and size) predict whether a procedure will be performed appropriately.  RESULTS.  In general, we found that little of the variability in the appropriateness of care (4 percent or less) could be explained on the basis of standard, easily obtainable data about the patient, the physician, or the hospital.  For all three procedures, however, performance in a teaching hospital increased the likelihood that the reasons would be medically appropriate (P = 0.09 for angiography, P = 0.30 for endoscopy, and P less than 0.01 for endarterectomy).  In addition, angiographies were more often performed for appropriate reasons in older or more affluent patients (P less than 0.01 for both).  Being treated by a surgeon who performed a high rather than a low number of procedures decreased the likelihood of an appropriate endarterectomy by one third, from 40 to 28 percent (P less than 0.01).  CONCLUSIONS.  Appropriateness of care cannot be closely predicted from many easily determined characteristics of patients, physicians, or hospitals.  Thus, for the present, if appropriateness is to be improved it will have to be assessed directly at the level of each patient, hospital, and physician.
Regression of coronary artery disease as a result of intensive lipid-lowering therapy in men with high levels of apolipoprotein B   BACKGROUND AND METHODS.  The effect of intensive lipid-lowering therapy on coronary atherosclerosis among men at high risk for cardiovascular events was assessed by quantitative arteriography.  Of 146 men no more than 62 years of age who had apolipoprotein B levels greater than or equal to 125 mg per deciliter, documented coronary artery disease, and a family history of vascular disease, 120 completed the 2 1/2-year double-blind study, which included arteriography at base line and after treatment.  Patients were given dietary counseling and were randomly assigned to one of three treatments: lovastatin (20 mg twice a day) and colestipol (10 g three times a day); niacin (1 g four times a day) and colestipol (10 g three times a day); or conventional therapy with placebo (or colestipol if the low-density lipoprotein [LDL] cholesterol level was elevated).  RESULTS.  The levels of LDL and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol changed only slightly in the conventional-therapy group (mean changes, -7 and +5 percent, respectively), but more substantially among patients treated with lovastatin and colestipol (-46 and +15 percent) or niacin and colestipol (-32 and +43 percent).  In the conventional-therapy group, 46 percent of the patients had definite lesion progression (and no regression) in at least one of nine proximal coronary segments; regression was the only change in 11 percent.  By comparison, progression (as the only change) was less frequent among patients who received lovastatin and colestipol (21 percent) and those who received niacin and colestipol (25 percent), and regression was more frequent (lovastatin and colestipol, 32 percent; niacin and colestipol, 39 percent; P less than 0.005).  Multivariate analysis indicated that a reduction in the level of apolipoprotein B (or LDL cholesterol) and in systolic blood pressure, and an increase in HDL cholesterol correlated independently with regression of coronary lesions.  Clinical events (death, myocardial infarction, or revascularization for worsening symptoms) occurred in 10 of 52 patients assigned to conventional therapy, as compared with 3 of 46 assigned to receive lovastatin and colestipol and 2 of 48 assigned to receive niacin and colestipol (relative risk of an event during intensive treatment, 0.27; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.10 to 0.77).  CONCLUSIONS.  In men with coronary artery disease who were at high risk for cardiovascular events, intensive lipid-lowering therapy reduced the frequency of progression of coronary lesions, increased the frequency of regression, and reduced the incidence of cardiovascular events.
Outcome and predictors of outcome in pediatric submersion victims receiving prehospital care in King County, Washington   Predictors of outcome in pediatric submersion victims treated by Seattle and King County's prehospital emergency services were studied.  Victims less than 20 years old were identified from hospital admissions and paramedic and medical examiners' reports.  The proportion of fatal or severe outcomes in patients were compared with various risk factors.  Of 135 patients, 45 died and 5 had severe neurologic impairment.  A subset of 38 victims found in cardiopulmonary arrest had a 32% survival rate, with 67% of survivors unimpaired or only mildly impaired.  The two risk factors that occurred most commonly in victims who died or were severely impaired were submersion duration greater than 9 minutes (28 patients) and cardiopulmonary resuscitation duration longer than 25 minutes (20 patients).  Both factors were ascertained in the prehospital phase of care.  Submersion duration was associated with a steadily increasing risk of severe or fatal outcomes: 10% risk (7/67) for 0 to 5 minutes, 56% risk (5/9) for 6 to 9 minutes, 88% risk (21/25) for 10 to 25 minutes, 100% risk (4/4) for greater than 25 minutes.  None of 20 children receiving greater than 25 minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation escaped death or severe neurologic impairment.  Our rates for saving all victims, particularly victims in cardiopulmonary arrest, are considerably higher than has been reported before the children.  Prompt prehospital advanced cardiac life support is the most effective means of medical intervention for the pediatric submersion victim.  Prehospital information provided the most valuable predictors of outcome.
Histologic investigation of vascular malformations of the face after transarterial embolization with ethibloc and other agents.  Twenty-one vascular malformations located in the facial area, 11 high-flow arteriovenous malformations and 10 slow-flow malformations, underwent combined treatment by embolization and later surgery.  Embolization was performed simultaneously with superselective angiography of the branches of the external carotid artery.  The new biodegradable fibrosing agent Ethibloc was used in 16 cases.  Histologic examination of the surgical specimens confirmed the good target orientation by the transarterial injection of Ethibloc.  Limitations of this technique are discussed.  The agent proved to have thrombogenic and fibrogenic properties.  Some of the vascular walls degenerated and ruptured following the embolization, but there were no instances of necrosis of interstitial tissue or skin.  Embolization treatment of vascular malformations of the face was not curative, but it facilitated subsequent surgery in all examined cases.
Surgical augmentation of skin blood flow and viability in a pig musculocutaneous flap model.  A porcine rectus abdominis musculocutaneous (TRAM) flap model was designed and validated in nine pigs.  This TRAM flap was based on the deep inferior epigastric (DIE) vessels with an 8 x 18 cm transverse skin paddle at the superior end of the rectus abdominis muscle.  The model was subsequently used to test our hypothesis of surgical augmentation of flap viability by vascular territory expansion.  Specifically, we observed that ligation of the superior epigastric (SE) vessels at 4, 7, 14, and 28 days (N = 6 to 8) prior to raising the TRAM flaps significantly increased (p less than 0.05) the length and area of the viable skin in the transverse skin paddles of the treatment flaps compared with the contralateral shammanipulated control flaps.  This significant increase in skin viability was seen to be accompanied by a significant increase (p less than 0.05) in skin and muscle capillary blood flow in the treatment TRAM flaps compared with the controls (N = 9).  The mechanism of vascular territory expansion is unclear.  We postulate that hypoxia resulting from the ligation of the superior epigastric vessels prior to the flap surgery may play a role in the triggering of the deep inferior epigastric artery to take over some of the territory previously perfused by the superior epigastric artery.  This would then increase the skin and muscle capillary blood flow in the transverse paddle when the TRAM flap was raised on the deep inferior epigastric vascular pedicle.
Critical ischemia times and survival patterns of experimental pig flaps.  Previous work on critical ischemia time suggested (1) a greater susceptibility of myocutaneous flaps over skin flaps to the ischemia reperfusion injury and (2) that duration of ischemia may affect the survival area of a flap.  Using a pig model, 55 animals were operated on and the critical ischemia times and survival patterns of the buttock skin (n = 85) and latissimus dorsi myocutaneous (n = 88) island flaps were determined after being submitted to 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, and 16 hours of normothermic ischemia.  The average critical ischemia times (CIT50) were determined to be 9 and 10 hours for the buttock skin and latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flaps, respectively.  Percentage of total area surviving (%TAS) in those flaps which did survive was adversely affected by increases in the ischemic interval in both flap models.  A statistically significant decrease in percentage of total area surviving was found after 6 and 8 hours of ischemia for the buttock skin and latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flaps, respectively.
Clinical, autonomic and therapeutic observations in two siblings with postural hypotension and sympathetic failure due to an inability to synthesize noradrenaline from dopamine because of a deficiency of dopamine beta hydroxylase.  A brother and sister with long-standing symptoms of postural hypotension are described.  They were considerably worse in the morning, after exercise and in warm weather.  In the male, erection was unaffected but ejaculation was prolonged or absent.  Both had nocturia, but there were no urinary bladder, bowel or sweating abnormalities.  Autonomic function tests confirmed sympathetic adrenergic failure with spared sympathetic cholinergic and intact parasympathetic function.  There were no other neurological abnormalities.  Noradrenaline and adrenaline were undetectable in the plasma, but plasma dopamine was elevated.  Urinary levels of noradrenaline and adrenaline metabolites were below detection limits, but dopamine metabolites were normal or elevated.  Dopamine beta-hydroxylase activity was undetectable in the plasma.  Immunohistochemical studies of perivascular cutaneous tissue confirmed normal peptidergic and tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactivity, with absent dopamine beta-hydroxylase immunoreactivity.  The findings were consistent with an enzymatic deficit in the conversion of dopamine to noradrenaline.  The parents were clinically and biochemically normal.  Treatment of both patients with the synthetic amino acid, d-l-threo-dihydroxyphenylserine, which contains a hydroxyl group and is converted to noradrenaline by dopa-decarboxylase, reduced symptoms and signs of postural hypotension and increased levels of plasma noradrenaline and its urinary metabolites.  In the male, ejaculation became possible.  Behavioural changes included a feeling of confidence and optimism, with a tendency to be argumentative.  The laevo isomer also raised blood pressure and plasma noradrenaline levels.  The drug had no direct pressor effects, as its actions were prevented by the dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor, carbidopa.
Clinical diagnosis of tamponade in Malawi.  A consecutive series of 25 Malawian patients with tamponade secondary to tuberculosis were compared to 25 patients with congestive cardiac failure, without pericardial effusion in a retrospective study.  More patients with tamponade had an impalpable apex beat (21/1), pulsus paradoxus (13/0), soft heart sounds (13/2), paradoxical rise in jugular venous pressure (6/0), and fewer had a murmur (1/14).  All these results are significant (p less than 0.05) by the chi 2 test with Yates' correction.  The presence of two or more of these discriminating physical signs has a positive predictive value of 75 per cent, and a negative predictive value of 99.5 per cent for the diagnosis of tamponade.  Clinical diagnosis of tamponade by primary health care personnel in Malawi should be possible, and lead to earlier treatment.
Effects of long-term verapamil therapy on serum lipids and other metabolic parameters.  Calcium antagonists have been used successfully in the management of hypertension for more than a decade, but less is known about their long-term metabolic effects.  To define the impact of one calcium antagonist, verapamil, on serum lipids and other metabolic parameters, we placed 45 hypertensive patients on verapamil monotherapy and followed them for 4 to 8 years.  After a mean treatment period of 5.3 years, total cholesterol and triglyceride levels were not significantly different from baseline, whereas the mean high-density lipoprotein cholesterol value increased significantly from 1.17 +/- 0.41 mmol/L at the initiation of treatment to 1.39 +/- 0.36 mmol/L at 5.3 years (p less than 0.05).  Other important biochemical parameters, including serum glucose, potassium and uric acid levels were unaffected by verapamil therapy.  No serious side effects or adverse cardiovascular events occurred during verapamil therapy, and there were no study dropouts.  It therefore seems likely that this agent will become increasingly useful in the long-term management of essential hypertension.
Anti-atherosclerotic and vasculoprotective actions of calcium antagonists.  Treatment of hypertension may prevent many of the complications attributable to blood pressure elevation, particularly those that are "pressure-related," such as stroke.  However, the atherosclerotic complications of hypertension, e.g., coronary artery disease manifested as coronary morbidity and mortality, have not been reduced significantly with antihypertensive therapy.  This disappointing outcome may reflect the adverse metabolic effects of the traditional therapies, diuretics and beta blockers, and their lack of specific vasoprotective properties.  Increasing attention is thus being paid to the newer antihypertensive agents, which typically have fewer adverse effects and perhaps more physiologic mechanisms of antihypertensive action.  Since calcium plays a key role in the genesis of atherosclerosis, calcium antagonists may positively affect the course of vascular disease.  Investigators have observed that calcium antagonists display clear antiatherosclerotic properties in experimental as well as clinical studies.  In one recently published clinical study, coronary artery disease was shown to develop more slowly, with a slower progression of individual stenoses, higher regression rate and less frequent occurrence of new lesions in patients treated chronically with verapamil compared to those receiving conventional therapies.  Other similar investigations are currently under way to evaluate the antiatherogenic properties of calcium antagonists, including the Frankfurt Isoptin Progression Study (FIPS), the Multicenter Isradipine Diuretic Atherosclerosis Study (MIDAS), the International Nifedipine Trial on Atherosclerosis Coronary Therapy (INTACT), and the large-scale Montreal Heart Institute Study.  Results of these studies, which use precise end points such as myocardial infarction, cerebral infarction and peripheral vascular disease, may revolutionize the treatment of hypertension by identifying therapeutic approaches that control both the pressure-related and atherosclerotic complications of the disease.
Secondary prevention with verapamil after myocardial infarction. The Danish Study Group on Verapamil in Myocardial Infarction.  The effect of verapamil on death and major events (i.e., death or reinfarction) after an acute myocardial infarction was studied in a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial, the Danish Verapamil Infarction Trial II (DAVIT II).  Eight hundred seventy-eight patients started treatment with verapamil 360 mg/day and 897 patients with placebo.  Treatment continued for up to 18 months (mean 16 months).  Ninety-five deaths and 146 major events occurred in the verapamil group and 119 deaths and 180 major events in the placebo group.  Eighteen-month mortality rates were 11.1 and 13.8% (hazard ratio 0.80, 95% confidence limits 0.63 to 1.05, p = 0.108), and major event rates 18.0 and 21.6% (0.80, 0.64 to 0.99, p = 0.027) in the verapamil and placebo groups respectively.  When combining the results of this trial with the results of the first Danish study on verapamil in myocardial infarction, the meta-analysis demonstrated that treatment with verapamil from the second week after an acute myocardial infarction resulted in a reduction of pooled odds ratios of 0.22 (95% confidence interval 0.01 to 0.37, p = 0.04) for death, 0.21 (0.05 to 0.35, p = 0.02) for major events, and 0.27 (0.06 to 0.43, p = 0.02) for first reinfarctions.  It is concluded that long-term treatment with verapamil after an acute myocardial infarction is associated with a significant reduction in overall mortality as well as major event and reinfarction rates.
Relation between lipids and atherosclerosis: epidemiologic evidence and clinical implications.  Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the leading cause of death in most developed countries.  Therefore, elucidation of risk factors and associated mechanisms for CAD has been a high priority.  Data from the Framingham Heart Study and other large-scale epidemiologic studies have identified major risk factors associated with CAD, demonstrating the adverse effects of increased total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and the protective effect of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol.  Other more recent investigations, including the Lipid Research Clinics Trial and the Helsinki Heart Study, have shown that lowering total cholesterol and raising high-density lipoprotein cholesterol significantly reduce the risk for CAD.  Because hypertension is also a significant risk factor for CAD, the assumption has been that blood pressure reduction should offer significant benefits in terms of CAD risk.  However, despite their antihypertensive efficacy, diuretics and beta blockers have failed to significantly reduce CAD morbidity or mortality.  The adverse effects of these antihypertensive agents on lipid profiles, glucose metabolism and other metabolic parameters may account for their disappointing performance in reducing CAD morbidity and mortality.  As a result, newer agents such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and calcium antagonists that appear to be free of such adverse effects have garnered considerable attention for their potential to reduce CAD risk.
Effects of hydralazine and prostaglandin E1 on regional myocardial function in the ischemic canine heart.  The effects of hydralazine and prostaglandin E1 on regional myocardial function were studied in dogs.  Sixteen dogs were randomly assigned to one of two drug treatment groups of eight dogs each.  The first group (G1) was treated with 0.4 mg/kg hydralazine administered as a bolus.  The second group (G2) received prostaglandin E1 given as an infusion for a total dose of 0.8 micrograms/kg.  Regional myocardial function was assessed through the measurement of myocardial segment shortening during systole.  We call this index percent systolic shortening (%SS).  An ischemic heart preparation was created by partial occlusion of coronary blood flow.  The degree of induced ischemia was determined by following the reduction in %SS.  Hydralazine reduced %SS of the ischemic myocardium while increasing the cardiac index, stroke volume index, and coronary blood flow.  Prostaglandin E1 increased %SS, cardiac index, and stroke volume index in the ischemic heart preparation.  Hydralazine, therefore, induced dissociation between global ventricular function and regional myocardial function whereas prostaglandin E1 did not.  The present findings emphasize that evaluation of vasoactive drugs should consider their effects on regional myocardial function as well as on global hemodynamics.
An increase in plasma cholesterol independent of thyroid function during long-term amiodarone therapy. A dose-dependent relationship.  OBJECTIVE: To determine whether long-term amiodarone treatment is associated with a rise in plasma cholesterol, and, if so, to analyze its relation with thyroid function.  DESIGN: Consecutive entry trial, including cardiac patients who initiated amiodarone medication but excluding those with abnormal thyroid function (defined as peak thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH] response to thyrotropin-releasing hormone [TRH] less than 2.8 or greater than 22.0 mU/L) either before or during amiodarone treatment.  PATIENTS: Twenty-three patients who remained euthyroid were studied.  INTERVENTION: Oral administration of amiodarone (mean duration of treatment, 17 months; range, 6 to 30 months).  MEASUREMENTS: Fasting plasma lipids, thyroid hormones, and peak TSH to TRH values were recorded before and every 6 months during amiodarone treatment.  RESULTS: Plasma cholesterol gradually increased from 5.1 +/- 0.2 mmol/L before treatment to 6.9 +/- 0.8 mmol/L after 30 months of amiodarone medication (P less than 0.001); the peak TSH response to TRH did not change.  When age- and sex-specific reference values were applied, 30% of the patients had cholesterol values above the 75th percentile before treatment; this number rose to 69% after 2 years of treatment.  The rise in plasma cholesterol was associated with an equal increase in apoprotein B.  Plasma cholesterol was not related to the daily dose of amiodarone or to plasma concentrations of amiodarone, desethylamiodarone, thyroxine (T4), triiodothyronine (T3), or reverse triiodothyronine (rT3).  Linear regression analysis indicated a positive relation between plasma cholesterol and the cumulative dose of amiodarone (r = 0.25, P less than 0.05).  CONCLUSION: Long-term amiodarone treatment is associated with a dose-dependent increase in plasma cholesterol that is independent of thyroid function.
Cardiac rehabilitation after coronary artery bypass grafting: effects on exercise performance and risk factors.  After coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), 49 nonselected patients followed a cardiac rehabilitation program that included medical follow-up and physical training, both in outpatient groups and on an individual basis at home.  The effect of the program on exercise test variables, coronary risk factors, and medication one year after surgery was compared to a nonexercised control group (n = 98).  The study group showed less increase in the rate-pressure product, indicating a favorable effect on myocardial oxygen consumption (0.7 +/- 5.4 vs 2.8 +/- 5.6, p less than .05); a lower frequency of angina at exercise testing (6% vs 18%, p less than .01); a reduction in resting systolic and diastolic blood pressure (9/4mmHg, p less than .01); fewer smokers (6% vs 17%, p less than .05); and fewer patients taking long-acting nitrates (0% vs 10.2%, p less than .05).  It is suggested, therefore, that an organized cardiac rehabilitation program may be advantageous after CABG.
A frameshift mutation leading to type 1 antithrombin deficiency and thrombosis.  Type 1 antithrombin III (ATIII) deficiency, which is the commonest form of inherited ATIII defect, is characterized by a quantitative reduction in both immunologically and functionally detectable protein.  This condition is associated with a high incidence of thromboembolic disorder.  Previous investigations have shown that the ATIII genes in the majority of cases are grossly intact, but the precise underlying molecular defects remain unknown.  We have investigated the molecular basis of a type 1 ATIII deficiency in an Italian kindred by enzymatic amplification of the ATIII gene sequences in affected family members and direct sequencing of the amplified genomic DNA.  A novel mutation, the deletion of a single T in the second position of codon 119, was identified in each of the affected individuals.  The resulting frameshift leads to a premature termination in codon 126, effectively resulting in a null allele.
Cardiac myosin-induced myocarditis. Heart autoantibodies are not involved in the induction of the disease.  We recently demonstrated that cardiac myosin is capable of inducing autoimmune myocarditis in genetically predisposed mice.  This disease parallels coxsackievirus B3-induced autoimmune myocarditis in many respects and is associated with high-titer autoantibodies specific for cardiac myosin.  The following lines of evidence suggest that these autoantibodies are not involved in the induction of autoimmune myocarditis: 1) immunoperoxidase staining of heart sections from cardiac myosin-immunized A/J and A.SW mice revealed IgG depositions only along damaged muscle fibres in infiltrated areas, but not in intact tissue; 2) myosin autoantibodies did not bind to the surface of viable cardiac myocytes isolated from mice, but only reacted with myocytes permeabilized with detergent; 3) mice treated with a single high dose of cyclophosphamide, which reduces the humoral immune response, still developed severe myocarditis, despite the fact that their autoantibody titers were reduced to the level of adjuvant-injected controls; and 4) passive transfer of high-titer myosin autoantibodies failed to induce myocarditis, although the titers in the recipients were comparable to those found in mice with cardiac myosin-induced disease.  Together, the results suggest that high-titer myosin autoantibodies are secondary rather than primary to the disease.
Circadian variations in myocardial ischemia. Implications for management.  Extended ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring in the patient's customary environment provides clear evidence of circadian patterns in myocardial ischemic episodes.  In patients with effort angina, the highest activity occurs between 6 AM and noon.  This coincides with peaks in diurnal variation of frequency of acute myocardial infarction, stroke, and sudden death.  A number of potential underlying common triggering mechanisms, including catecholamine secretion, sympathetic nervous system activity, blood pressure, heart rate, cortisol secretion, and aggregability of platelets, exhibit similar surges.  As a result of these coinciding morning peaks, myocardial oxygen demand is increased and oxygen supply reduced after a person arises in the morning.  Attention to this vulnerable period is merited in the timing and choice of medication, both to prevent or reduce ischemia and to modify potential disease-triggering mechanisms.
Angiotensin I-forming angiotensinogenases in extrarenal vasculature and in the kidney.  The intention of this study was to characterize angiotensin I-forming angiotensinogenases (AIFAs) in rat extrarenal arterial walls and to clarify whether these enzymes are also present in the kidney.  A further aim was to identify AIFAs in human vasculature and to establish whether they are affected in essential hypertension.  Sprague-Dawley rats and vascular sections of patients undergoing corrective surgery were studied.  Enzyme kinetic assays were performed using angiotensin I radioimmunoassay and purified natural angiotensinogens.  Fast protein liquid chromatography was employed for biochemical characterization.  A series of AIFAs with various isoelectric points, molecular weights and pH optima was detected in rat extrarenal vascular and, with differing distributions of enzyme activities, in renal tissues.  In extrarenal arteries the main form of renal renin was present with a relatively low activity only.  AIFAs were also demonstrable in human extrarenal vasculature and behaved like plasma renin in essential hypertension.  The results indicate the existence of an intrinsic human vascular RAS in extrarenal (and renal) arteries.  Extrarenal arterial AIFAs are not generally stimulated in essential hypertensives, as previously postulated.
Role of angiotensin in the renal vasoconstriction observed during the development of genetic hypertension.  Studies have examined renal function to determine the role of the kidney in the pathogenesis and maintenance phases of hypertension in the Okamoto-Aoki strain of spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR).  As compared to age-matched Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY), 4- to 6-week old SHR are moderately hypertensive and have a reduced glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and renal blood flow (RBF), and an increased renal vascular resistance.  Cross-breeding studies indicate the reduction in RBF and GFR in young SHR is genetically linked to the hypertension and thus may be of primary pathogenetic importance.  The combination of an elevated vascular resistance and reduced RBF and GFR in young SHR implicates increased activity of a vasoconstrictor system(s), decreased activity of a vasodilator system(s), or both.  Observations from several laboratories support the notion that endogenous angiotensin II contributes to the renal vasoconstriction in young SHR during the developmental phase of hypertension.  Acute and chronic inhibition of angiotensin converting enzyme reduce arterial pressure, reduce renal vascular resistance and increase renal blood flow in young and adult SHR.  Renal vascular tone in SHR is more dependent on angiotensin converting enzyme activity than that in WKY.  The ability of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors to produce renal vasodilation may be responsible, at least in part, for its antihypertensive effects.  Other studies indicate that renal vascular reactivity to angiotensin II is exaggerated in young SHR.  The strain differences in renal reactivity to angiotensin II can be abolished by cyclooxygenase inhibition with indomethacin, indicating that endogenous prostanoids counteract some of the constrictor action of angiotensin II, with more pronounced buffering activity in WKY.
Influences of angiotensin on renal function in renal vascular hypertension.  The scope and the magnitude of the roles which angiotensin plays in the generation and maintenance of elevated blood pressure in models of renal vascular hypertension are continuing to expand.  It is now clear that specific angiotensin dependent mechanisms contribute importantly to the pathophysiology of hypertension and altered renal function in models of two-kidney, one clip hypertension in rats.  The generation of angiotensin in the local intrarenal environment of the kidney is a new and potentially important mechanism contributing to altered renal function in these models.  Application of antagonists of the renin-angiotensin system to rat models of renal vascular hypertension indicate that the effects of angiotensin attenuate renal hemodynamic and excretory behavior, particularly in the nonclipped kidney.  Further, angiotensin may attenuate the efficiency of autoregulation of renal hemodynamics in the nonclipped kidney.  Evidence that inhibition of angiotensin reverses or improves these altered hemodynamic and excretory functions indicate that angiotensin may contribute importantly to the pathophysiology of hypertension in these models by altering or impairing the ability of the nonclipped or normal kidney to excrete sodium and volume.
Thromboxane biosynthesis in cardiovascular diseases.  Sudden fissuring of an atherosclerotic plaque has been suggested as the primary trigger of transient spontaneous ischemia in both the coronary and cerebral circulation.  Measurements of urinary 11-dehydro-TXB2 and 2,3-dinor-TXB2, as well as results of Aspirin trials, have suggested that episodic platelet activation at the site of this acute vascular lesion is mediated, at least partly, by enhanced thromboxane (TX) A2 biosynthesis.  Thus, episodic increases in metabolite excretion have been detected in unstable angina.  Aspirin (75-325 mg/day) prevents about one third of all fatal and nonfatal thrombotic events in this setting.  That a similar "dynamic" thrombotic process occurs during the early phase of acute myocardial infarction is suggested by thromboxane metabolite measurements and by the results of the ISIS-2 trial showing a similar impact of short-term Aspirin therapy to that seen in unstable angina.  Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty is associated with transiently enhanced TXA2 biosynthesis and Aspirin-suppressable periprocedural thrombotic complications.  On the other hand, both non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and type IIa hypercholesterolemia are associated with a relatively reproducible and persisting abnormality of TXA2-dependent platelet function.  This association is likely to reflect a systemic rather than localized stimulus to platelet activation and a continuous rather than episodic alteration.  Low-dose (50 mg/day) Aspirin can largely suppress thromboxane metabolite excretion in both diseases.  Thus, low-dose Aspirin and/or selective prostaglandin H2/TXA2-receptor antagonists may be important tools to test the hypothesis that TXA2-dependent platelet activation represents an important transducer of the enhanced thrombotic risk associated with these metabolic abnormalities.
Effect of Bay U 3405, a new thromboxane antagonist, on collagen-induced thromboembolism in rabbits.  Bay U 3405 [(3R)-3-(4-fluorophenylsulfonamido)-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-9- carbazolepropanoic acid] potently inhibits platelet aggregation, thromboxane A2-induced contraction of smooth muscles, and coronary artery thrombosis.  We have previously demonstrated inhibition of arachidonic acid-induced sudden death by Bay U 3405.  The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of Bay U 3405 on thromboembolism provoked by collagen.  Collagen fibrils dissolved in an isotonic glucose solution were injected into a marginal ear vein of anesthetized rabbits.  Sudden death occurred within a few minutes due to elevated thromboxane A2 levels causing intravascular platelet aggregation and myocardial ischemia.  In the vehicle-treated group, 100% of the animals died.  One of the most prominent parameters was the massive fall in blood pressure.  All animals pretreated with 10 mg/kg orally Bay U 3405 survived, showing only a transient hypotensive effect.  Tracings of the electrocardiogram and heart rate were unchanged.  Bay U 3405 will therefore be useful to elucidate the role of thromboxane A2 in various cardiovascular and respiratory diseases.
Aspirin reduces the growth of medial and neointimal thickenings in balloon-injured rat carotid arteries.  We analyzed the effect of Aspirin on the growth of experimentally induced vascular thickenings in rat carotid arteries.  Vascular thickenings were induced by denudation of the endothelium in the left carotid artery with a balloon catheter.  Administration of Aspirin-rich food (17.4 g/kg body wt/day) was started 1 week before and continued 2 weeks after injury.  Nine rats were used.  A control group of equal size received normal food.  Sizes of the tunica media, the neointima, and the open vessel lumen were measured on cross sections of carotid segments with the aid of a videomorphometry system.  The results show that in the Aspirin group, neointimal lesions are significantly smaller than in the control group (0.14 mm2 versus 0.23 mm2; p less than 0.5).  Thickenings of the tunica media are also reduced (0.11 mm2 versus 0.12 mm2; p less than 0.5).  It is suggested that Aspirin reduces both medial hypertrophy and neointimal outgrowth in injury-induced atherosclerosis.
Effect of naproxen and sulindac on blood pressure response to atenolol.  Twenty-eight patients with mild to moderate essential hypertension well controlled by atenolol entered a five-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of the effects of sulindac and naproxen on blood pressure (BP) control.  Atenolol alone was administered during weeks 1, 3, and 5.  Naproxen or sulindac was administered with atenolol during week 2, with crossover during week 4.  Data were analyzed for 27 of the patients (one dropped out after developing a skin rash).  Naproxen significantly increased the systolic BP compared with placebo (mean 4.0 mm Hg; 95 percent confidence interval, 1.1-7.0; p less than 0.05).  There were no significant differences in systolic BP during sulindac administration compared with placebo or naproxen.  No significant effects on diastolic BP were observed.  Weight was increased by naproxen and sulindac compared with placebo (mean 0.6-0.8 kg, p less than 0.05), although not to a clinically significant extent.  One-week therapy with naproxen has a greater potential than sulindac to increase systolic BP in well-controlled hypertensive patients receiving atenolol; however, the increase is minor and unlikely to be of clinical significance.
High-dose epinephrine improves outcome from pediatric cardiac arrest.  STUDY OBJECTIVE: Animal studies suggest that the standard dose of epinephrine (SDE) for treatment of cardiac arrest in human beings may be too low.  We compared the outcome after SDE with that after high-dose epinephrine (HDE) in children with refractory cardiac arrest.  DESIGN: Prospective intervention versus historic control groups.  TYPE OF PARTICIPANTS: Two similar groups of 20 consecutive patients each (median ages, 2.5 and 3 years) with witnessed cardiac arrest who remained in arrest after at least two SDEs (0.01 mg/kg).  INTERVENTIONS: Treatment with an additional SDE versus HDE (0.2 mg/kg).  MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The rates of return of spontaneous circulation and long-term survival were compared.  Fourteen of the HDE group (70%) had return of spontaneous circulation, whereas none of the SDE group did (P less than .001).  Eight children survived to discharge after HDE, and three were neurologically intact at follow-up.  No significant toxicity from HDE was observed.  CONCLUSION: HDE provided a higher return of spontaneous circulation rate and a better long-term outcome than SDE in our series of pediatric cardiac arrest.  HDE may warrant incorporation into standard resuscitation protocols at an early enough point to prevent irreversible brain injury.
Systemic atropine administration during cardiac arrest does not cause fixed and dilated pupils.  OBJECTIVES: Systemic administration of atropine during CPR may postpone brain death determination because of its reputed ability to produce fixed and dilated pupils.  We studied the effect of atropine administered in the usual doses as an adjunct to endotracheal intubation and for cardiac arrest to determine if it would interfere with neurological assessment.  DESIGN: Two groups of children were studied.  Group 1 consisted of 28 patients who received atropine (0.03 +/- 0.003 mg/kg) prior to endotracheal intubation.  Group 2 consisted of 21 patients previously without evidence of brainstem disease who suffered a witnessed arrest and had prompt return of spontaneous circulation and received an atropine dose of 0.03 +/- 0.01 mg/kg.  RESULTS: In group 1, pupillary size averaged 4.02 +/- 0.78 mm before and 4.75 mm +/- .84 mm after atropine (P less than .001).  In group 2, the pupillary examination was conducted 30 minutes after return of spontaneous circulation.  The pupillary diameter was 4.80 +/- 0.91 mm.  All pupils were reactive to light in both groups.  CONCLUSION: Atropine administration in conventional dose causes slight pupillary dilation but does not abolish pupillary light reactivity.
Echocardiographic left ventricular mass and electrolyte intake predict arterial hypertension.  OBJECTIVE: To identify predictors of arterial hypertension.  PATIENTS: One hundred thirty-two normotensive adults from a large employed population.  METHODS: Echocardiography, standard blood tests, and 24-hour urine collection, at baseline and after an interval of 3 to 6 years (mean, 4.7 +/- 0.8 years).  RESULTS: At follow-up, 15 subjects (11%; 7 men, 8 women) had a systolic blood pressure greater than 140 mm Hg or a diastolic blood pressure greater than 90 mm Hg or both (mean, 143 +/- 7 and 87 +/- 6 mm Hg, respectively).  At baseline, subjects who developed hypertension had a greater left ventricular mass index than those who did not (92 +/- 25 compared with 77 +/- 19 g/m2 body surface area; P less than 0.005) and higher 24-hour urinary sodium/potassium excretion ratio (3.6 +/- 1.7 compared with 2.6 +/- 1.4; P less than 0.04); there were no differences in race, initial age, systolic or diastolic blood pressure, coronary risk factors, or plasma renin activity.  The likelihood of developing hypertension rose from 3% in the lowest quartile of sex-adjusted left ventricular mass index to 24% in the highest quartile (P less than 0.005); a parallel trend was less regular for quartiles of the sodium/potassium excretion ratio (P less than 0.04).  In multivariate analyses, follow-up systolic pressures in all subjects and in the 117 who remained normotensive were predicted by initial age, systolic blood pressure, black race, and sex-adjusted left ventricular mass index; final diastolic blood pressure was predicted by its initial value, plasma triglyceride levels, urinary sodium/potassium ratio, low renin activity, black race, and plasma glucose level.  CONCLUSIONS: Echocardiographic left ventricular mass in normotensive adults is directly related to the risk for developing subsequent hypertension.  Left ventricular mass improves prediction of future systolic pressure, whereas diastolic pressure is more related to initial metabolic status.  Black race is also an independent determinant of higher subsequent blood pressure.
Noninvasive detection of occlusive disease of the carotid siphon and middle cerebral artery.  Recently, transcranial Doppler sonography has been introduced into clinical practice for noninvasive investigation of the large intracranial arteries.  To determine its accuracy for detection of stenosing or occluding lesions, 133 consecutive patients were studied by both transcranial Doppler sonography and selective cerebral arteriography.  Statistical analysis of findings was done separately for various arterial segments.  High values for sensitivity and specificity were found for detecting obstruction of the carotid siphon and main stem of the middle cerebral artery.  Diagnostic reliability of transcranial Doppler sonography was also confirmed by the calculation of a chance-corrected measure of agreement (kappa), which was close to + 1 in all subanalyses.  Transcranial Doppler sonography seems to be a valuable tool for noninvasive detection of intracranial lesions of the middle cerebral artery and carotid siphon.
Use of quinapril in the elderly patient.  Quinapril hydrochloride is a nonsulfhydryl angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor that has been extensively tested and found effective when administered once-a-day to hypertensive patients of both sexes and all degrees of hypertension and cardiac compromise, including those with left ventricular hypertrophy, with and without congestive heart failure.  Observations with earlier ACE inhibitors led to reports that this class of drugs was relatively ineffective in older hypertensive patients.  To ascertain the role of quinapril (greater than or equal to 10 mg/day) in older patients, its blood pressure-lowering effects in 1,175 hypertensive patients less than or equal to 65 years of age were compared with those in 304 patients greater than 65 years of age.  An excellent response was observed in patients greater than 65 years of age with mild to moderate hypertension (diastolic BP, 95 to 105 mm Hg) and moderate to severe hypertension (diastolic BP, 106 to 115 mm Hg).  The reductions in blood pressure achieved with quinapril were at least comparable to those obtained in the younger hypertensives, and were numerically (but not statistically) greater in the mild to moderate group (-14 mm Hg v-12 mm Hg).  In addition, the percentage of patients who experienced adverse experiences was lower in the greater than 65 group than in the less than or equal to 65 group (15% v 19%).  The main adverse experiences reported included dizziness, headache, cough, fatigue, and hypotension.  These findings indicate that quinapril is at least as safe and effective in older hypertensives as in younger patients.
Quinapril in chronic heart failure.  Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors are now firmly established in the treatment of patients with chronic heart failure (CHF).  Their beneficial acute and chronic hemodynamic effects are not associated with reflex tachycardia or drug tolerance.  Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors produce symptomatic improvement and improve exercise capacity in all grades of heart failure.  They also improve the prognosis of patients with severe heart failure.  Quinapril is a recently introduced, nonsulfhydryl ACE inhibitor, whose intermediate half-life makes it well-suited for the treatment of patients with CHF.  The acute and chronic hemodynamic effects of quinapril are similar to those of other ACE inhibitors.  In a large, multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled study of 225 patients with mild to moderate CHF, 10 to 40 mg/day quinapril significantly improved clinical status and exercise capacity in a dose-related manner.  The incidence of side effects did not differ significantly from that of placebo.  The initial studies with quinapril are promising and warrant further clinical investigation of this compound.
Elevated insulin, norepinephrine, and neuropeptide Y in hypertension.  To investigate the relationship between insulin and sympathetic activity, plasma norepinephrine, neuropeptide Y, serum glucose and insulin concentrations were measured in ten age-, weight-, and sex-matched normotensive and untreated hypertensive subjects at fasting and 2 h following ingestion of a 75 g oral glucose dose.  Hypertensives had higher fasting serum insulin (27 +/- 6 v 12 +/- 2 microU/mL; P = .02) and plasma norepinephrine (356 +/- 38 v 235 +/- 35 pg/mL; P = .03) concentrations than normotensives.  Glucose load increased serum insulin (P less than .001) and plasma norepinephrine concentrations (P = .001) in both groups and hypertensives had still higher postglucose insulin (P = .003) and norepinephrine levels (P = .003) than normotensives.  Fasting neuropeptide Y was higher in hypertensives than in normotensives (P = .03) and correlated with age in both groups (r = 0.7; r = 0.77).  Postglucose serum insulin correlated positively with plasma norepinephrine (r = 0.75; P = .013) in normotensives, but these parameters correlated negatively in hypertensives (r = -0.7; P = .036).  We hypothesize that elevated plasma norepinephrine and neuropeptide Y levels reflect an increased level of sympathetic nervous activity in hypertensives, which in turn may be responsible for the abnormal relationship between plasma NE and insulin levels.
Dietary calcium, vascular reactivity, and genetic hypertension in the Lyon rat strain.  In order to examine the relationship existing between dietary calcium and the development of hypertension, we developed a long-term study in the Lyon hypertensive rat strain (LH) and two control strains, the Lyon normotensive (LN) and low blood pressure rats (LL) given enriched (HCa, 2.5%), deprived (LCa, 0.03%) and normal (NCa, 0.6%) calcium diets.  Evolution of body weight, systolic blood pressure (BP), plasma calcium and magnesium was monitored from 4 to 23 weeks of age.  Total cardiovascular reactivity and contractile response of isolated aorta to norepinephrine were measured at 23 weeks of age.  LH rats on HCa diet failed to develop hypertension (BP less than 150 mm Hg) whereas LH rats on LCa diet exhibited higher blood pressure levels than their controls fed the NCa diet.  Moreover, in LN rats HCa diet slightly decreased BP whereas LCa had no effect.  In the LL rats, on the contrary, only LCa diet slightly increased BP.  In vivo responsiveness to NE was significantly higher in LH compared to LL and LN rats fed a NCa diet.  HCa and LCa diets both induced a significant decrease in this response in LH rats.  HCa diet increased the response in LN rats but decreased it in LL.  In contrast, at the same age, the in vitro contractile response of isolated aorta to NE was significantly decreased in LH compared to LN and LL rats receiving NCa diet.  Moreover in LH and LN rats on HCa diet the contractile response was markedly increased but no significant difference was observed with LCa diet.
Sodium sensitive and sodium retaining hypertension.  The differences between sodium sensitive and sodium retaining hypertension were theoretically considered using a water tank model of body fluid volume-blood pressure regulation.  If an outlet valve is attached to a tank with a base area corresponding to the reciprocal of total peripheral resistance (TPR) and water is poured into this tank at a rate corresponding to the amount of Na+ intake, then equilibrium should be achieved at a certain water level, volume and output from the outlet, which represent mean arterial pressure (MAP), cardiac output (CO) and urinary Na+ excretion.  The height of the outlet from the tank bottom and the size cross-sectional area, of the outlet correspond to the x-intercept and slope of the renal function (pressure-natriuresis) curve, respectively.  In both nonsodium sensitive hypertension, due to the shift of the curve toward a higher blood pressure level (elevated height of the outlet) without change in the slope (size of the outlet), and sodium sensitive hypertension, due to the depressed slope of the curve (reduced outlet size), not only MAP (water level) but also CO (water volume) are increased, resulting in sodium retaining hypertension, if TPR (reciprocal of base area) remained unchanged, while CO is relatively unchanged, resulting in nonsodium retaining hypertension, if TPR is elevated.  Thus, the MAP and its sensitivity to sodium intake is determined by the renal function curve.  Since body fluid volume is determined by both the renal function curve and TPR, however, changes in TPR during the development of hypertension is a major factor in determining whether or not the body fluid volume has to change only a small amount or a large amount.  Therefore, the sodium sensitivity of blood pressure and sodium retention must be considered separately.
Hemodynamic and endocrine effects of mental stress in untreated borderline hypertension.  Mental arithmetic and mirror tracing were compared in 40 untreated patients with borderline hypertension, tested in random sequence in standardized protocols.  Both tasks significantly increased systolic and diastolic blood pressure, heart rate, cardiac index, plasma renin, and decreased peripheral resistance.  Mental arithmetic also increased cholesterol, triglycerides and HDL; plasma catecholamines were not changed significantly.  Lipid changes were correlated with blood pressure changes.  These methods will be useful in exploring the relationships between hemodynamic reactivity to stress, and the presence and progression of atherosclerosis, as well as testing the effects of antihypertensive drugs on stress-induced changes that may influence atherosclerotic complications of hypertension.
The role of protein kinase C and calcium in the regulation of norepinephrine release from the vascular adrenergic neurons in hypertension.  This study was designed to investigate the role of protein kinase C and calcium in vascular adrenergic transmission in hypertension.  In perfused mesenteric vasculatures of spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR, 7 to 10 weeks old) and age-matched Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY), we have examined the effects of the protein kinase C inhibitor H-7 on endogenous norepinephrine release and vascular responsiveness during nerve stimulation.  Endogenous norepinephrine release and pressor responses during periarterial nerve stimulation were significantly greater in SHR than in WKY.  The protein kinase C inhibitor H-7 inhibited the stimulation-induced norepinephrine release and pressor responses in a dose-dependent manner.  The magnitude of these suppressive responses were more pronounced in SHR than in WKY.  Calcium removal from extracellular fluid also reduced the norepinephrine release more strongly in SHR than in WKY.  These results demonstrate that the regulation of norepinephrine release might be more dependent on protein kinase C and calcium in the blood vessels of SHR, which could contribute, at least partially, to the pathogenesis of this form of hypertension.
Vascular renin and hypertension. Uptake versus synthesis.  Conventional radioimmunoassay techniques demonstrated in the aortic wall a renin-like activity which is derived from plasma but has a longer half-life than plasma renin.  Blood pressure elevation after renin injection into nephrectomized rats correlates better with aortic renin than with plasma renin.  Vascular and other extrarenal tissue can also synthesize renin.  Using a ribonuclease protection technique for the detection of renin messenger RNA we have been able to demonstrate that a wide variety of extrarenal tissues contain the renin message.  In at least two of these, the brain and the liver, renin messenger RNA levels are unaffected by changes in dietary salt or by changes in systemic blood pressure.  Functional studies using isolated human resistance vessels also demonstrate the presence of renin-like activity by a contractile response to added renin substrate.  It is suggested that extrarenal tissues therefore contain renin-like activity derived both from uptake and from local synthesis.  These systems may be regulated in different ways and may carry out different functions.
Role of basic fibroblast growth factor in vascular lesion formation.  In the present study we investigated whether basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) plays a role in the proliferative response of smooth muscle cells (SMCs) to denuding injury.  Rat carotid smooth muscle was found to express the mRNA for bFGF, and bFGF protein was found to be present in rat aorta by immunoblot analysis.  Systemically administered bFGF was a potent mitogen for vascular SMCs in arteries denuded with a balloon catheter, increasing replication from 11.5% in controls to 54.8%.  Denudation with a device (filament loop), which causes only minimal damage to medial SMCs, showed a similar increase in replication (1.3% versus 43.3%) after bFGF infusion.  In unmanipulated vessels, however, SMCs were unresponsive to infused bFGF.  Infusion of a "mitotoxin" (bFGF conjugated to saporin) caused a greater than 50% decrease in the number of viable SMCs in the arterial wall after balloon injury.  Prolonged administration of bFGF (12 micrograms/day for 2 weeks) after balloon injury caused an approximately twofold increase in intimal thickening.  These results show that bFGF, which is synthesized by the arterial wall, could be a potent mitogen for SMCs in vivo and suggest that any release of endogenous bFGF may be capable of stimulating SMC proliferation, which may subsequently lead to intimal lesion formation.
Myocardial capillary permeability after regional ischemia and reperfusion in the in vivo canine heart. Effect of superoxide dismutase.  This study assesses the effect of the superoxide anion scavenger superoxide dismutase on myocardial capillary permeability-surface area (PS) products for small hydrophilic molecules after ischemia and reperfusion.  Open-chest dogs underwent a 20-minute occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary artery followed by 1 hour of reperfusion.  Myocardial plasma flow rate and capillary extraction of chromium 51-labeled EDTA or technetium 99m-labeled diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid were measured by the single-injection, residue-detection method before ischemia and 5 and 60 minutes after the start of reperfusion.  In 13 dogs, no scavenger treatment was given (nonprotected control group), whereas eight dogs were treated systemically with 15,000 units/kg superoxide dismutase during 1 hour, starting 20 minutes before ischemia.  In the control group, three dogs developed reperfusion ventricular fibrillation in contrast to none in the superoxide dismutase group.  Before ischemia, plasma flow rate, myocardial capillary extraction fraction, and PS values were similar in the two groups.  Five minutes after the start of reperfusion, plasma flow rate increased significantly (p less than 0.01) in both groups.  In the control group, capillary extraction fraction increased by 12% (p = NS) in spite of the higher plasma flow; these increases in capillary extraction fraction and plasma flow induced a 69% increase in PS (p less than 0.01).  In the superoxide dismutase-treated group, capillary extraction fraction decreased by 32% (p less than 0.05) in accordance with the increased plasma flow rate, resulting in an unchanged PS (p = NS).  Sixty minutes after reperfusion, plasma flow rate, capillary extraction fraction, and PS returned to preocclusion values in both groups (p = NS).  The increased capillary extraction fraction and PS values seen in the control group suggest an increased capillary permeability after ischemia and reperfusion.  Superoxide anions seem to participate, directly or indirectly, in this response.
Mechanism of early ischemic contractile failure. Inexcitability, metabolite accumulation, or vascular collapse?  The basis of early ischemic contractile failure was investigated in perfused ferret hearts at 27 degrees C.  Isovolumic left ventricular developed pressure fell by more than 50% within 30 seconds of the onset of total global ischemia and reached zero by 5 minutes.  Monophasic action potential recordings revealed no decrease in excitability during this period.  Phosphorus nuclear magnetic resonance spectra obtained at 30-second resolution showed no significant changes in inorganic phosphate or phosphocreatine during the first 30 seconds of ischemia.  Intracellular pH (pHi) and ATP changed even more slowly; therefore, none of these metabolites could account for the rapid fall in force.  To gauge the contribution of intravascular pressure, we compared ordinary aortic flow occlusion with tissue-level ischemia induced by massive coronary microembolization at the level of the precapillary arterioles.  Functional depression developed significantly more slowly in the microembolized hearts, despite accumulation of inorganic phosphate and protons comparable with that in ordinary ischemia.  After microembolization, the time course of functional depression reflected much more closely the concomitant inorganic phosphate and pHi changes.  Thus, our results provide novel evidence supporting the importance of vascular collapse in the mechanism of early ischemic contractile failure.
Significance of the number of stimuli to initiate ouabain-induced arrhythmias in the intact heart.  Ouabain-induced arrhythmias are a well-known model used to study triggered activity resulting from delayed afterdepolarizations.  In the intact heart, initiation of these arrhythmias is promoted by pacing, especially at fast rates.  However, the relevance of the number of stimuli is unknown.  In conscious dogs with formalin-induced atrioventricular block, we investigated the effect of variations in pacing mode on 1) the behavior of nonsustained triggered rhythms at progressive levels of ouabain intoxication, and 2) the induction of sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT).  Twenty experiments were analyzed.  Ouabain was administered as a bolus of 40 micrograms/kg followed by continuous infusion.  Every 15 minutes the pacing protocol was repeated, with a maximum of 10, until completion or induction of VT.  When VT could not be initiated, the experiment was repeated at least 1 week later, adding 5-10 micrograms/kg ouabain to the bolus and increasing the infusion rate correspondingly.  This was repeated until VT could be induced.  Four interstimulus intervals (200, 400, 600, and 800 msec) and seven numbers of stimuli (5, 10, 20, 35, 50, 100, and 150) were given in two pacing protocols.  The effect of these protocols on 1) the number of induced beats per stimulation train, 2) their first postpacing interval, and 3) induction of VT were studied.  Initiation of VT occurred after 75 +/- 42 minutes.  The bolus of ouabain needed to induce VT was inversely related to the body weight of the animals.  Progression of ouabain intoxication resulted in 1) a significant increase in the number of induced beats per stimulation train and 2) a significant shortening of the first postpacing interval.  Stimulation at a faster rate and/or more stimuli resulted in 1) a significantly pronounced increase in the number of induced beats at the higher levels and 2) a significantly shorter first postpacing interval at successive levels of ouabain intoxication.
[Ca2+]i transients in the cardiomyopathic hamster heart.  Intracellular [Ca2+] transients were studied in isolated hearts of healthy and cardiomyopathic hamsters in late failure perfused with glucose or pyruvate.  Hearts of healthy hamsters developed similar pressures when perfused with either glucose or pyruvate, and [Ca2+]i transients were comparable in amplitude when perfused with either substrate.  On the other hand, hearts of cardiomyopathic hamsters in late failure developed normal pressure when perfused with pyruvate but developed depressed pressure (50%) when perfused with glucose.  The amplitude of [Ca2+]i transients fell severely and was associated with a high diastolic [Ca2+]i in cardiomyopathic hamster hearts when the perfusate was switched from pyruvate to glucose.  The high phosphomonoester sugars as evidenced by 31P nuclear magnetic resonance studies and the depressed oxygen consumption in the cardiomyopathic hamster hearts perfused with glucose reflect an inhibition in glycolysis and a subsequent decrease in mitochondrial activity.  Without an adequate delivery of substrate to the mitochondria in the cardiomyopathic hamster, the myocardium is no longer capable of maintaining its [Ca2+]i homeostasis.
Effect of preconditioning ischemia on reperfusion arrhythmias after coronary artery occlusion and reperfusion in the rat.  Severe arrhythmias occur predictably on reperfusion after 5 minutes of coronary occlusion in the rat.  There is little data available on whether ischemic preconditioning (PC) of hearts can reduce the incidence of such arrhythmias.  The effect of PC (three cycles of 2 minutes of coronary occlusion and 5 minutes of reperfusion) on development of arrhythmias after a subsequent 5-minute coronary artery occlusion and reperfusion was studied.  Rats (n = 16 each group) underwent 5-minute occlusion and reperfusion alone or preceded by PC; arrhythmias were monitored during ischemia and for 10 minutes of reperfusion, and biopsies were taken for creatine phosphate and adenosine triphosphate in ischemic and nonischemic zones of the left ventricle.  PC reduced the incidence of ventricular tachycardia (VT) during occlusion (81% control versus 13% PC, p less than 0.001).  On subsequent reperfusion, ventricular fibrillation (VF) developed in zero PC animals versus 13 (81%) of controls (p less than 0.001), and irreversible VF in zero of PC versus seven (44%) of controls (p = 0.007).  VT occurred in four (25%) of PC versus all (100%) of controls (p less than 0.001).  PC reduced mean duration of VT plus VF from 320 +/- 54 to 5 +/- 1 seconds (p less than 0.001) and delayed arrhythmia onset from 8 +/- 2 to 85 +/- 35 seconds after reperfusion.  There was no difference in creatine phosphate levels in the ischemic zone at the end of reperfusion in PC animals compared with controls without irreversible VF (16.2 +/- 4.1 versus 15.5 +/- 3.9 nmol/mg protein, p = NS).
Passive smoking and heart disease. Epidemiology, physiology, and biochemistry.  The evidence that ETS increases risk of death from heart disease is similar to that which existed in 1986 when the US Surgeon General concluded that ETS caused lung cancer in healthy nonsmokers.  There are 10 epidemiological studies, conducted in a variety of locations, that reflect about a 30% increase in risk of death from ischemic heart disease or myocardial infarction among nonsmokers living with smokers.  The larger studies also demonstrate a significant dose-response effect, with greater exposure to ETS associated with greater risk of death from heart disease.  These epidemiological studies are complemented by a variety of physiological and biochemical data that show that ETS adversely affects platelet function and damages arterial endothelium in a way that increases the risk of heart disease.  Moreover, ETS, in realistic exposures, also exerts significant adverse effects on exercise capability of both healthy people and those with heart disease by reducing the body's ability to deliver and utilize oxygen.  In animal experiments, ETS also depresses cellular respiration at the level of mitochondria.  The polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in ETS also accelerate, and may initiate, the development of atherosclerotic plaque.  Of note, the cardiovascular effects of ETS appear to be different in nonsmokers and smokers.  Nonsmokers appear to be more sensitive to ETS than do smokers, perhaps because some of the affected physiological systems are sensitive to low doses of the compounds in ETS, then saturate, and also perhaps because of physiological adaptions smokers undergo as a result of long-term exposure to the toxins in cigarette smoke.  In any event, these findings indicate that, for cardiovascular disease, it is incorrect to compute "cigarette equivalents" for passive exposure to ETS and then to extrapolate the effects of this exposure on nonsmokers from the effects of direct smoking on smokers.  These results suggest that heart disease is an important consequence of exposure to ETS.  The combination of epidemiological studies with demonstration of physiological changes with exposure to ETS, together with biochemical evidence that elements of ETS have significant adverse effects on the cardiovascular system, leads to the conclusion that ETS causes heart disease.  This increase in risk translates into about 10 times as many deaths from ETS-induced heart disease as lung cancer; these deaths contribute greatly to the estimated 53,000 deaths annually from passive smoking.  This toll makes passive smoking the third leading preventable cause of death in the United States today, behind active smoking and alcohol.
Multicenter patency trial of intravenous anistreplase compared with streptokinase in acute myocardial infarction. The TEAM-2 Study Investigators.  Thrombolytic therapy has been shown to improve clinical outcome when administered early after the onset of symptoms of acute myocardial infarction; the mechanism of benefit is believed to be reestablishment and maintenance of coronary artery patency.  Anistreplase is a second generation thrombolytic agent that is easily administered and has a long duration of action.  To compare anistreplase (30 units/2-5 min) and therapy with the Food and Drug Administration-approved regimen of intravenous streptokinase (1.5 million units/60 min), a randomized, double-blind, multicenter patency trial was undertaken in 370 patients less than 76 years of age with electrocardiographic ST segment elevation who could be treated within 4 hours of symptom onset.  Coronary patency was determined by reading, in a blinded fashion, angiograms obtained early (90-240 minutes; mean, 140 minutes) and later (18-48 hours; mean, 28 hours) after beginning therapy.  Early total patency (defined as Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction grade 2 or 3 perfusion) was high after both anistreplase (132/183 = 72%) and streptokinase (129/176 = 73%) therapy, and overall patency patterns were similar, although patent arteries showed "complete" (grade 3) perfusion more often after anistreplase (83%) than streptokinase (72%) (p = 0.03).  Similarly, residual coronary stenosis, determined quantitatively by a validated computer-assisted method, was slightly less in patent arteries early after anistreplase (mean stenosis diameter, 74.0%) than streptokinase (77.2%, p = 0.02).  In patients with patent arteries without other early interventions, reocclusion risk within 1-2 days was defined angiographically and found to be very low (anistreplase = 1/96, streptokinase = 2/94).  Average coronary perfusion grade was greater, and percent residual stenosis was less, at follow-up than on initial evaluation and did not differ between treatment groups.  Enzymatic and electrocardiographic evolution was not significantly different in the two groups.  Despite rapid injection, anistreplase was associated with only a small (4-5 mm Hg), transient (at 5-10 minutes) mean differential fall in blood pressure.  In-hospital mortality rates were comparable for anistreplase and streptokinase (5.9%, 7.1%).  Stroke occurred in one (0.5%) and three (1.6%) patients, respectively; one stroke was hemorrhagic.  Other serious bleeding events and adverse experiences occurred uncommonly and with similar frequency in the two groups.  Thus, for the end points of our study (patency, safety), anistreplase and streptokinase showed overall favorable and relatively comparable outcomes, with a few differences.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
Detection of patients at risk for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation during sinus rhythm by P wave-triggered signal-averaged electrocardiogram.  To determine whether patients at risk for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation could be detected while in sinus rhythm, the signal-averaged electrocardiogram triggered by P waves was recorded in 42 patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (Paf group) and in 50 control patients.  The root mean square voltages (LP10, LP20, and LP30) for the last 10, 20, and 30 msec and the duration (Ad) of filtered (40-300 Hz) P wave of the spatial magnitude were measured.  LP10 and LP20 were significantly lower in the Paf than in the control group (LP10, 1.92 +/- 0.58 versus 2.49 +/- 0.78 microV, p less than 0.001; LP20, 2.47 +/- 0.78 versus 3.46 +/- 1.20 microV, p less than 0.0001), although no significant difference in LP30 was found between groups.  Ad was also significantly longer in the Paf than in the control group (137.0 +/- 14.3 versus 118.6 +/- 11.3 msec, p less than 0.001).  These differences between the Paf and control groups remained significant even after dividing by the presence or absence of organic heart diseases.  The criteria of "LP20 = 3.5 microV or less" and "Ad greater than 120 msec" as defining "atrial late potential" gave a sensitivity of 91% and a specificity of 76%.  These findings suggest that patients at risk for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation could be detected while in sinus rhythm by using the P wave-triggered signal-averaged electrocardiogram.
In vivo technetium-99m S12 antibody imaging of platelet alpha-granules in rabbit endothelial neointimal proliferation after angioplasty.  To examine the specificity of technetium-99m monoclonal antibody (S12) imaging for identifying activated platelets at interventional injury sites in atherosclerotic rabbit arteries, subgroups of unheparinized rabbits (n = 39) underwent serial percutaneous transluminal aortic angioplasty (PTA) procedures (with or without intravascular stent placement) followed by in vivo and then ex vivo gamma camera imaging, scanning, and immunoelectron microscopy to determine the intravascular loci of S12 Fab' antibody binding.  Despite angiographic vessel patency, image-derived ratios of in vivo S12 binding in injured versus uninjured vascular segments were significantly increased (p less than 0.05) after one PTA (1.3 +/- 0.17, n = 7), PTA twice at 6-week intervals (1.4 +/- 0.22, n = 7), and PTA plus stent placement (1.6 +/- 0.28, n = 7) compared with control experiments (1.1 +/- 0.13, n = 7).  Ex vivo imaging of blood-free excised aortas confirmed S12 localization at PTA (2 +/- 0.4, n = 3) and PTA plus stent placement (5 +/- 3.8, n = 7) sites (both p less than 0.05 versus controls).  S12 antibody uptake decreased significantly (p less than 0.05) at 1 week after PTA plus stent placement in vivo (1.1 +/- 0.10, n = 4) and ex vivo (1.6 +/- 0.7, n = 3).  Electron microscopic studies confirmed dense platelet, fibrin, and red blood cell deposition in regions of acute injury, with endothelial neointimal proliferation at 1 week after PTA.  Immunoelectron microscopic studies confirmed specific in vivo S12 binding (22:1 versus nonrelevant IgG) at sites of alpha-granule GMP-140 expression in activated platelets.  Therefore, S12 studies may be useful to localize sites of platelet-derived mitogen release at arterial PTA injury sites.
Reduction of myocardial reperfusion injury by intravenous adenosine administered during the early reperfusion period.  Adenosine influences the function of several cell types thought to be involved in the pathogenesis of myocardial reperfusion injury.  We have previously demonstrated that intracoronary administration of adenosine enhances myocardial salvage 24 hours after reperfusion.  To determine if these beneficial effects could be obtained during a prolonged period of reperfusion using an intravenous route of administration, 22 closed-chest dogs were subjected to 90 minutes of proximal left anterior descending coronary artery occlusion and 72 hours of reperfusion.  Animals randomly received either intravenous adenosine (0.15 mg/kg/min) or an equal volume of Ringer's lactate during the first 150 minutes of reperfusion.  The area at risk was defined in vivo with Monastral blue, and infarct size was measured histologically with Mallory's trichrome stain.  Serial global and regional ventricular function were determined with contrast ventriculography and analyzed using a computerized radial shortening method.  Biopsies were obtained from the central ischemic zone to assess endothelial ultrastructure and capillary obstruction.  No significant effects in heart rate or blood pressure were noted during adenosine infusion.  Transmural collateral blood flow during ischemia was similar in the groups.  Infarct size expressed as a percentage of the anatomical area at risk was significantly less in the adenosine-treated group (35.3 +/- 4.3% in controls versus 17.1 +/- 4.3% in treated animals, p less than 0.01).  A progressive decrease in transmural blood flow was noted in control animals during reperfusion, resulting in a significant reduction at 3 hours compared with the preocclusion value (0.69 +/- 0.11 ml/min/g [at baseline versus 0.45 +/- 0.10 ml/min/g at 3 hours, p less than 0.05]).  In contrast, flow in adenosine animals at 3 hours was similar to baseline values (0.91 +/- 0.15 ml/min/g at baseline versus 0.98 +/- 0.14 ml/min/g at 3 hours, p = NS) and was significantly higher (p less than 0.05) than the control group.  Radial shortening in the ischemic zone was significantly improved at 3 (-2.6 +/- 2.8% in controls versus 11.6 +/- 3.3% in treated animals, p less than 0.01) and 72 hours (5.5 +/- 2.0% in controls versus 17.3 +/- 3.5% in treated animals, p less than 0.01) after reperfusion in treated animals.  Electron microscopy showed reduced neutrophil and erythrocyte plugging of capillaries with relative preservation of endothelial cell structure in the adenosine group.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
Identification of viable myocardium in patients with chronic coronary artery disease and left ventricular dysfunction. Comparison of thallium scintigraphy with reinjection and PET imaging with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose   In patients with chronic coronary artery disease and left ventricular dysfunction, the distinction between ventricular dysfunction arising from myocardial fibrosis and ischemic, but viable, myocardium has important clinical implications.  By positron emission tomography (PET), enhanced fluorine-18-labeled fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in myocardial segments with impaired function and reduced blood flow is evidence of myocardial viability.  Reinjection of thallium-201 at rest immediately after stress-redistribution imaging may also provide evidence of myocardial viability by demonstrating thallium uptake in regions with apparently "irreversible" defects.  To compare these two methods, we studied 16 patients with chronic coronary artery disease and left ventricular dysfunction (ejection fraction, 27 +/- 9%), all of whom had irreversible defects on standard exercise-redistribution thallium single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging.  Thallium was reinjected immediately after the redistribution study, and SPECT images were reacquired.  The patients also underwent PET imaging with FDG and oxygen-15-labeled water.  A total of 432 myocardial segments were analyzed from comparable transaxial tomograms, of which 166 (38%) had irreversible thallium defects on redistribution images before reinjection.  FDG uptake was demonstrated in 121 (73%) of these irreversible defects.  Irreversible defects were then subgrouped according to the degree of thallium activity, relative to peak activity in normal regions.  Irreversible defects with only mild (60-85% of peak activity) or moderate (50-59% of peak) reduction in thallium activity were considered viable on the basis of FDG uptake in 91% and 84% of these segments, respectively.  In contrast, in irreversible defects with severe reduction in thallium activity (less than 50% of peak), FDG uptake was present in 51% of segments.  In such severe defects, an identical number of segments (51%) demonstrated enhanced uptake of thallium after reinjection.  In these severe "irreversible" defects, data on myocardial viability were concordant by the two techniques in 88% of segments, with 45% identified as viable and 43% identified as scar on both PET and thallium reinjection studies.  These observations suggest that thallium imaging can be used to identify viable myocardium in patients with chronic coronary artery disease and left ventricular dysfunction.  Most irreversible defects with only mild or moderate reduction in thallium activity represent viable myocardium as confirmed by FDG uptake.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
Analysis of baroreflex control of heart rate in conscious dogs with pacing-induced heart failure.  The autonomic components of the baroreflex control of heart rate were evaluated in conscious mongrel dogs before and after 4-6 weeks of ventricular pacing (250 beats/min).  Arterial baroreflex sensitivity (BRS) was determined by the slopes of linear regression of pulse interval versus the preceding systolic arterial pressure in response to bolus injections of either phenylephrine or nitroglycerin.  BRS was significantly depressed in the heart failure state [nitroglycerin slope, 5.0 +/- 2.7 (mean +/- SD) versus 16.6 +/- 5.1 msec/mm Hg, p less than 0.005; phenylephrine slope, 15.0 +/- 14.8 versus 32.0 +/- 26.7 msec/mm Hg, p less than 0.005].  There was no depression in BRS in dogs that were used as time controls or were acutely paced for 30 minutes.  After beta 1-adrenergic blockade with metoprolol, the resting heart rate in the heart failure state was depressed more than in the normal state (-17.0 +/- 5.0% versus -3.2 +/- 3.4%, p less than 0.001).  Atropine significantly increased resting heart rate more in the normal state than in the heart failure state (115.8 +/- 36.7% versus 25.4 +/- 14.5%, p less than 0.005).  Thus, dogs in the heart failure state appear to have high resting cardiac sympathetic tone and low resting vagal tone.  For nitroglycerin administration, metoprolol depressed BRS by 47.6 +/- 26.3% in the normal state and by 63.6 +/- 58.5% in the heart failure state.  Atropine decreased the BRS by 86.7 +/- 7.8% in the normal state and by 39.5 +/- 30.2% in the heart failure state.
Reentrant ventricular arrhythmias in the late myocardial infarction period: mechanism by which a short-long-short cardiac sequence facilitates the induction of reentry.  The electrophysiological mechanism by which a short-long-short stimulated cardiac sequence facilitates the induction of ventricular tachyarrhythmia was investigated in dogs 4 days after ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery.  In these dogs, reentry develops in the surviving electrophysiologically abnormal epicardial layer that overlies the infarct zone when premature stimulation results in a critically long arc of functional conduction block.  The activation wavefront circulates around both ends of the arc, coalesces, and conducts slowly distal to the arc before reactivating sites proximal to the arc to initiate a figure-eight reentrant circuit.  Epicardial isochronal activation maps and effective refractory periods (ERPs) were determined during three different stimulation protocols: A, a basic train of eight beats at a cycle length of 300 msec followed by a single premature stimulus (S2); B, a basic train of eight beats at a cycle length of 300 msec with abrupt lengthening of the last cycle of the train before S2 to 600 msec; C, a basic train of eight beats at a cycle length of 600 msec followed by S2.  Protocol B was found to result in a differential lengthening of ERP at adjacent sites within the border of the epicardial ischemic zone, whereas protocols A and C induced, respectively, comparable shortening and lengthening of ERPs at the same sites.  The differential lengthening of ERPs at adjacent sites resulted in an increased dispersion of refractoriness so that a premature stimulus induced functional conduction block between those sites.  The development of a longer arc of conduction block and, hence, a longer reentrant pathway as well as slower conduction of the circulating wavefront during protocol B allowed more time for refractoriness to expire proximal to the arc and for the circulating wavefront to reexcite those sites to initiate reentry.  The lengthening of ERP, associated with a single long cycle (protocol B), ranged from 44% to 79% of the total increase in ERP after a series of eight long cycles (protocol C).  Epicardial sites with longer ERPs located close to the center of the ischemic zone showed more lengthening of refractoriness during protocol B compared with more normal sites near the border of the ischemic zone.  This strongly suggests that the increased dispersion of refractoriness during protocol B is caused by the shorter memory of ischemic myocardium to the cumulative effects of preceding cycle lengths.
Ischemic heart disease and platelet aggregation. The Caerphilly Collaborative Heart Disease Study.  The Caerphilly Collaborative Heart Disease Study is based on a large cohort of men (2,398) aged 49-66 years at the time of study.  Platelet aggregation induced by collagen, thrombin, and ADP was measured in fasting blood samples and was related to prevalent angina, past myocardial infarction, and electrocardiographic evidence of ischemic heart disease.  A number of subjects had taken aspirin, other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or other drugs affecting platelet aggregation 7 days before blood sample collection; after the exclusion of these subjects, data were available for 1,811 men.  No relations were demonstrated with angina, but significant relations were shown between past myocardial infarctions and electrocardiographic evidence of ischemia and ADP-induced aggregation (both primary and secondary) and between electrocardiographic evidence of ischemia and thrombin-induced aggregation.  The strongest relation indicated more than a twofold increase in the odds of a past myocardial infarction in subjects of the highest fifth of ADP-induced primary platelet aggregation compared with the lowest fifth.  No significant relations were detected with collagen-induced aggregation.  Accounting for a number of possible confounding factors had a relatively small impact on the relations between platelet aggregation and ischemic heart disease.  Other evidence, including the well-established effect of aspirin on reducing the incidence of ischemic heart disease, indicates that the relations we describe are unlikely to be simply an effect of IHD on platelets.
Myocardial infarction in Mexican-Americans and non-Hispanic whites. The San Antonio Heart Study.  Mexican-American men experience reduced cardiovascular mortality compared with non-Hispanic white men.  There is no corresponding ethnic difference in cardiovascular mortality in women.  The difference in men could result either from a lower incidence of cardiovascular disease or a lower case fatality rate among Mexican-Americans.  Although the incidence of cardiovascular disease in Mexican-Americans is unknown, we have collected data on prevalence of myocardial infarction in 5,148 individuals examined in the San Antonio Heart Study, a population-based survey of cardiovascular disease conducted between 1979 and 1988 in Mexican-Americans and non-Hispanic whites aged 25-64 years.  Myocardial infarction was assessed by Minnesota-coded electrocardiograms and by a self-reported history of a physician-diagnosed heart attack.  For both end points, the age-adjusted prevalence of myocardial infarction was lower in Mexican-American men than in non-Hispanic white men.  After adjustment for age and diabetes status (present/absent), the odds of a myocardial infarction, as defined by either criterion, was approximately one third lower in Mexican-American men than in non-Hispanic white men (p = 0.06).  In women, the prevalence of both myocardial infarction end points was slightly higher in Mexican-Americans than in non-Hispanic whites, although neither of these differences was significant.  Although the ethnic differences in prevalence in this study were not statistically significant, their pattern parallels the pattern in the mortality due to cardiovascular diseases.  Therefore, the results support the hypothesis that the reduced cardiovascular mortality rate observed in Mexican-American men reflects a lower incidence of myocardial infarction rather than a reduced case fatality rate because the latter would result in a higher prevalence.
Diltiazem increases late-onset congestive heart failure in postinfarction patients with early reduction in ejection fraction. The Adverse Experience Committee; and the Multicenter Diltiazem Postinfarction Research Group   The Multicenter Diltiazem Postinfarction Trial (MDPIT) reported no consistent diltiazem effect on new or worsened congestive heart failure (CHF) during 12-52 months' follow-up after acute myocardial infarction.  This was puzzling in light of the observation that patients with findings suggesting left ventricular dysfunction (LVD) at baseline on diltiazem had more cardiac events (cardiac mortality or recurrent nonfatal infarction) than such patients on placebo.  We hypothesized that diltiazem increased the frequency of late CHF as well as of cardiac events, but only in patients predisposed by LVD.  Using the same characterizing variables as the primary MDPIT analysis, we found that patients with pulmonary congestion, anterolateral Q wave infarction, or reduced ejection fraction (EF) at baseline were more likely to have CHF during follow-up than those without these markers of LVD.  CHF was particularly frequent in the patients with LVD who were randomized to diltiazem.  Among those with a baseline EF of less than 0.40, late CHF appeared in 12% (39/326) receiving placebo and 21% (61/297) receiving diltiazem (p = 0.004).  Life table analysis in patients with an EF of less than 0.40 confirmed more frequent late CHF in those taking diltiazem (p = 0.0017).  In addition, the diltiazem-associated rise in the frequency of late CHF was progressively greater with increasingly severe decrements in baseline EF.  This diltiazem effect was absent in patients with pulmonary congestion at baseline but an EF of 0.40 or more, suggesting a unique association between diltiazem-related late CHF and systolic LVD.
Transesophageal Doppler echocardiography evaluation of coronary blood flow velocity in baseline conditions and during dipyridamole-induced coronary vasodilation   Transesophageal echocardiography allows the evaluation of proximal coronary artery anatomy and coronary blood flow velocity (CBFV).  To assess the potential of transesophageal echocardiography in evaluating CBFV and its variations induced by coronary-active drugs, we studied 15 patients by high-quality pulsed wave Doppler recordings of CBFV.  In these patients, transesophageal Doppler evaluation of CBFV was performed before, 2 minutes after cessation of dipyridamole infusion (0.56 mg/kg in 4 minutes), and 2 minutes after aminophylline infusion (240 mg injected 4 minutes after cessation of dipyridamole infusion).  The following CBFV parameters were evaluated at each of the three steps of the study protocol: maximal and mean diastolic velocities and maximal and mean systolic velocities.  Furthermore, the following indexes of coronary flow reserve were evaluated: the ratio between maximal diastolic velocity recorded after and before dipyridamole administration and the ratio between mean diastolic velocity recorded after and before dipyridamole administration.  Nine of the 15 patients had a normal left anterior descending coronary artery (group A), whereas the remaining six had significant (less than or equal to 75%) stenosis (group B).  In group A patients, all CBFV parameters increased significantly during dipyridamole infusion and returned to near baseline values after aminophylline infusion.  In group B patients, on the other hand, none of the CBFV parameters increased after dipyridamole infusion.  Dipyridamole/baseline maximal diastolic velocity and mean diastolic velocity ratios were, respectively, 3.22 +/- 0.96 and 3.04 +/- 0.88 in group A and 1.46 +/- 0.45 (p less than 0.01 versus group A) and 1.48 +/- 0.49 (p less than 0.01 versus group A) in group B patients.
Regurgitant jet size by transesophageal compared with transthoracic Doppler color flow imaging.  Combined echocardiography and Doppler color flow mapping from transthoracic imaging windows has become the standard method for the noninvasive assessment of valvular regurgitation.  This study compared regurgitant jet areas by Doppler color flow imaging derived from the newer transesophageal approach with measurements obtained from conventional transthoracic apical views.  Maximal regurgitant jet area determinations and an overall visual estimate of lesion severity were obtained from 42 patients who underwent color flow examination by both techniques.  Seventy-three regurgitant lesions were visualized by transesophageal flow imaging: 34 mitral, 22 aortic, and 17 tricuspid jets.  Transthoracic studies in the same patients revealed fewer regurgitant lesions for each valve; 20 mitral, 16 aortic, and 12 tricuspid (p = 0.0009).  A comparison of maximal jet areas determined by transesophageal and transthoracic studies showed a good overall correlation (r = 0.85, SEE = 2.8 cm2) and a systematic overestimation by the transesophageal technique (TEE = 0.96 TTX + 2.7).  For the subgroup with mitral insufficiency, valve lesions visualized by both techniques were larger by the transesophageal approach (n = 18, 6.0 versus 3.6 cm2, p = 0.008).  Semiquantitative visual grading of individual valve lesions by two independent observers revealed a higher grade of regurgitation with more jets classified as mild (38 versus 25), moderate (18 versus 13), and severe (17 versus 10) by esophageal imaging than by transthoracic imaging.  Thus, transesophageal color flow mapping techniques yield a higher prevalence of valvular regurgitation than do transthoracic techniques in the same patients.  Jet area and the overall estimate of regurgitant lesion severity were also greater by transesophageal color Doppler imaging compared with standard transthoracic imaging.
Elevated pulmonary artery pressure. An independent predictor of mortality.  Analyses in this study were based on hemodynamic and angiographic data obtained in a cohort of 1,371 predominantly black patients during right and left heart catheterization.  All patients were followed up prospectively for a mean of 117 weeks, and 103 fatal events were recorded.  In Cox survival analysis, three variables were found to be independently related to survival: pulmonary artery mean pressure (PAMP), number of stenosed vessels, and left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (p less than 0.01); in multivariate stepwise analysis, PAMP entered the model first with the largest chi 2 value of the three prognostic variables (chi 2 = 33.4; p less than 0.0001).  The PAMP was 32 percent higher in decedents compared with survivors (25 + 11 mm Hg vs 19 + 8 mm Hg, p less than 0.01 [mean, SD]) and a 10 mm Hg increase in PAMP was associated with a more than fourfold increase in the relative risk of dying; this finding was independent of pulmonary vascular resistance and therefore could not be attributed to primary pulmonary vascular or parenchymal disease.  In both the subgroup of 1,118 patients with a normal LV ejection fraction (greater than 50 percent) and the 253 patients with a reduced ejection fraction (less than 50 percent), PAMP emerged as an independent predictor of mortality (p less than 0.0001 and 0.01, respectively), and is therefore a marker of cardiac disease beyond impairment of systolic contractile function.  Among patients without obstructive coronary artery disease, PAMP alone provided prognostic information in the multivariate survival analysis.
Renal vein thrombosis. Initial manifestation of Goodpasture's syndrome.  We report a patient who presented with renal vein thrombosis and nephrosis that progressed to alveolar hemorrhage and renal failure.  Renal biopsy immunofluorescence and serum antiglomerular basement membrane antibody titer studies confirmed the diagnosis of Goodpasture's syndrome.  To our knowledge, this is the first report of renal vein thrombosis as the initial presentation of Goodpasture's syndrome.
Safety and efficacy of thrombolytic therapy for superior vena cava syndrome   The experience at the Cleveland Clinic from 1982 to 1990 using thrombolytic therapy for superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome was retrospectively reviewed.  Sixteen patients, 11 of whom had indwelling central venous catheters, were treated with either urokinase (n = 11) or streptokinase (n = 5).  Either urokinase (4,400 U/kg bolus followed by 4,400 U/kg/h) or streptokinase (250,000 U bolus followed by 100,000 U/h) was used, and venograms were performed before and after.  Overall, 56 percent of patients had complete clot lysis and relief of symptoms.  Thrombolytic therapy was effective in eight (73 percent) of 11 patients receiving urokinase and one (20 percent) of five patients receiving streptokinase.  Of those with a central venous catheter, eight (73 percent) of 11 patients were successfully lysed, whereas only one (20 percent) of five patients was successfully lysed if no catheter was present.  If thrombolytic therapy was performed less than or equal to five days of symptom onset, seven (88 percent) of eight patients were successful, if thrombolytic therapy was performed greater than five days after symptom onset, two (25 percent) of eight patients were successful.  Symptoms were relieved and the catheter was preserved in patients in whom thrombolytic therapy was effective.  Factors predicting success were as follows: (1) the use of urokinase compared with streptokinase; (2) the presence of a central venous catheter; and (3) a duration of symptoms less than or equal to five days.
Risk factors for gestational diabetes in black population.  In a long-term longitudinal study of gestational diabetes mellitus in Black women, risk factors that were identified were age, obesity, a family history of diabetes, and the presence of hypertension.  Poor predictors were a history of a previous large-for-date infant, parity, and age at first pregnancy.  The prevalence of smooth muscle and nuclear autoantibodies was higher in gestational diabetic subjects.  Gestational diabetic subjects who required insulin for glycemic control were more obese, had a lower frequency of the Bf-F phenotype and a higher frequency of the Bf-F1 phenotype, and had a lower frequency of the type 2 allele at the polymorphic locus adjacent to the insulin gene.  Restriction-fragment-length polymorphisms flanking the insulin and apolipoprotein A-I and C-III genes, although not associated with gestational diabetes mellitus, may be associated with hyperlipidemia and subsequent atherosclerosis.
Calcium channel blockers in geriatric hypertension.  Though the calcium channel blockers have been used to treat angina pectoris for almost a decade, the long-acting forms of these agents that have become available in the last few years have made them practical for use as antihypertensive agents as well.  They are becoming increasingly popular in this role, especially to treat elderly hypertensive patients.  Because they are vasodilators with a mild diuretic action, they are logical treatment choices for the majority of hypertensive patients who have increased peripheral vascular resistance.  They offer the advantage of a dual benefit for hypertensive patients with angina, and they have no effect on carbohydrate or lipid metabolism.  Disadvantages include cost and a side effect profile that includes headaches, palpitations, ankle edema, and constipation.
Congestive heart failure: a current overview.  Congestive heart failure (CHF), a disease seen primarily in the older patient, can be due to either systolic or diastolic dysfunction.  Management is quite different if the heart failure is due to a filling abnormality as compared to poor ventricular systole.  The disorder also poses many diagnostic pitfalls in the elderly.  Current understanding of CHF and its influence on diagnosis and management is the focus of this review.
Training increases muscle blood flow in rats with peripheral arterial insufficiency.  This study investigated the effect of physical training on muscle blood flow (BF) in rats with peripheral arterial insufficiency during treadmill running.  Bilateral stenosis of the femoral artery of adult rats (300-350 g) was performed to reduce exercise hyperemia in the hindlimb but not limit resting muscle BF.  Rats were divided into normal sedentary, acute stenosed (stenosed 3 days before the experiment), stenosed sedentary (limited to cage activity), and stenosed trained (run on a treadmill by a progressively intense program, up to 50-60 min/day, 5 days/wk for 6-8 wk).  Hindlimb BF was determined with 85Sr- and 141Ce-labeled microspheres at a low (20 m/min) and high treadmill speed (30-40 m/min depending on ability).  Maximal hindlimb BF was reduced to approximately 50% normal in the acute stenosed group.  Total hindlimb BF (81 +/- 5 ml.min-1.100 g-1) did not change in stenosed sedentary animals with 6-8 wk of cage activity, but a redistribution of BF occurred within the hindlimb.  Two factors contributed to a higher BF to the distal limb muscle of the trained animals.  A redistribution BF within the hindlimb occurred in stenosed trained animals; distal limb BF increased to approximately 80% (P less than 0.001) of the proximal tissue.  In addition, an increase in total hindlimb BF with training indicates that collateral BF has been enhanced (P less than 0.025).  The associated increase in oxygen delivery to the relatively ischemic muscle probably contributed to the markedly improved exercise tolerance evident in the trained animals.
Paradoxical embolism: an underestimated entity. A plea for comprehensive work-up.  Forty-one cases of arterial embolism were reviewed.  The work-up included M + 2D echocardiography in 29 patients (71%), arteriography in 22 (54%), both echocardiography and arteriography in 19 (46%), and abdominal aortic ultrasound in 18 (43%).  The sources of emboli were probable cardiac (8 = 20%)--mural cardiac thrombus detected by echocardiogram; possible cardiac (12 = 29%)--arrhythmias or other cardiac pathology detected without mural thrombus; probable arterio-arterial (7 = 17%)--proximal arterial thrombus detected; probable paradoxical embolism (2 = 5%)--fulfills the Johnson criteria with cardiac defect and right-to-left shunt detected by contrast echo in one patient and cardiac catheterization in the other; possible paradoxical embolism (3 = 7%)--meets two of three Johnson criteria without evidence of other source; and unknown source (9 = 22%)--conventional work-up negative or incomplete.  Five of nine patients (56%) less than 50 years old had probable or possible paradoxical embolism, while in two patients (22%), the origin was unknown.  Conclusion: (1) A significant proportion of patients with an arterial embolus are discharged with the source of emboli unknown, (2) paradoxical embolism must be considered and contrast saline or transesophageal echocardiogram should be done in patients under 50 years old.
Splenorenal arterial shunt in the treatment of renovascular hypertension. Approach by a lumbar-retroperitoneal incision.  In a period of 16 years, 29 consecutive patients were operated on for a splenorenal arterial shunt through a lumbotomy incision and a retroperitoneal approach.  There were 18 males and 11 females with a medium age of 42 years.  All cases had uncontrollable and severe hypertension for an average medium time of 48 months, 11 patients had variable degrees of renal insufficiency.  The diagnosis was made utilizing standard methods including in all cases angiography of the abdominal aorta, celiac axis and renal arteries.  One patient died after the operation due to intestinal infarction, the remaining have been followed for a medium time of 50 months.  All patients improved or cured their renal insufficiency.  The hypertension was cured in 23, improved in 4 and failed in 1, this latter patient was successfully autotransplanted.  A precise exposition of the surgical technique is presented with comments about their advantages and indications.  A review of the literature in surgical experience with the technique of splenorenal arterial anastomosis has been done.
Clinical results of femoropopliteal bypass using externally supported (EXS) Dacron grafts: with a comparison of above- and below-knee anastomosis.  As of the end of September 1989, 52 EXS Dacron grafts had been implanted for femoropopliteal bypass operations.  The distal ends of 27 grafts were anastomosed to above-knee popliteal arteries and those of 25 grafts to below-knee popliteal arteries.  The cumulative patency rate of above-knee grafts was 71.3% at 54 months, and that of below-knee grafts was 78.8% at 48 months (n.s.).  Kinking and stenosis of the arteriosclerotic proximal and/or mid popliteal artery when the knee was bent were angiographically remarkable.  These changes may explain why some femoropopliteal grafts occlude with time and why the late results of above-knee grafts are not much better than those of below-knee grafts.
Crural artery bypass with adjunctive arteriovenous fistula. A modification in distal anastomosis.  We carried out crural artery bypass with an adjunctive arteriovenous fistula in 8 lower extremities of 7 patients with severe ischemic symptoms and poor distal run-off.  Mean blood flow rates in the implanted grafts ranged from 43 to 340 ml/min and those of the reconstructed crural arteries from 20 to 100 ml/min.  A stenotic lesion was noted on postoperative angiogram in one patient and stasis symptoms caused by downward blood flow into the distal veins in another.  The other patients have remained well with good function of the grafts 1-5 years after surgery.  We modified the distal corner of the anastomosis as follows: three additional interrupted simple sutures were made on the anterior wall of the concomitant arteriotomy and venotomy incisions after making the common posterior wall of the vessel incisions.  A vascular pocket formed at the distal corner of the anastomosis prevents stricture at the anastomosis.  The vein is finally ligated just distal to the fistula to intercept downward blood flow into the distal veins.  This modification in technique is recommended to prevent stricture of the distal anastomosis and postoperative stasis symptoms.
Preoperative evaluation and surgical treatment for tricuspid regurgitation associated with acquired valvular heart disease. The Kay-Boyd method vs the Carpentier-Edwards ring method.  This study compared the results of annuloplastic repair of tricuspid regurgitation (TR) using Doppler echocardiography.  Sixty-three patients who underwent tricuspid annuloplasty were studied.  Thirty-four patients received Kay-Boyd annuloplasty and 29 Carpentier-Edwards ring annuloplasty.  A new classification of TR based on the direction and area of regurgitation flow on Doppler echocardiogram was applied preoperatively.  In the Kay-Boyd group, 10 cases showed massive TR and 24 cases showed localized TR preoperatively.  Localized TR was well controlled in all cases, but 8 of 9 cases of massive TR showed grade III residual TR.  In the C-E group, 21 cases showed massive TR and 8 cases showed localized TR.  All cases were well controlled postoperatively.  We conclude that (1) although the Kay-Boyd method is acceptable for localized TR, the C-E method should be employed for massive TR; (2) analyzing the regurgitant pattern of TR by Doppler echocardiogram is useful in selecting an appropriate surgical technique.
New quantitative method for evaluating tricuspid regurgitation.  A new quantitative method for evaluating regurgitation (TR) is proposed in order to select the most suitable treatment for functional TR associated with acquired valvular heart disease.  The regurgitant volume per beat (VTR) is calculated using two-dimensional color Doppler and continuous-wave Doppler echocardiographies.  In a study of 48 patients, preoperative VTR showed a significant correlation with tricuspid annular diameter at end-diastole, right atrial mean pressure and right ventricular end-diastolic pressure.  Patients were classified into 3 groups according to preoperative VTR: Group I, VTR less than 10 cc (no.  18); Group II, VTR = 10-20 cc (no.  18); Group III, VTR greater than or equal to 20 cc (no.  12).  This classification correlated well with the intraoperative findings of TR.  In all Group I patients, VTR decreased without any tricuspid valve repair.  In Group II, 17 of 18 patients underwent tricuspid annuloplasty, and showed a decrease in VTR to below 10 cc after surgery.  In Group III, 10 underwent tricuspid annuloplasty and 2 tricuspid valve replacement.  Three of the 10 with tricuspid annuloplasty showed a significant degree of postoperative VTR (10-20 cc).  These 3 patients as well as the 2 with tricuspid valve replacement showed a preoperative peak-to-peak pressure difference across the tricuspid valve during the ejection phase (RVsp-TAv) of less than or equal to 20 mmHg and tricuspid annular diameter at end-diastole of greater than or equal to 50 mm.  In conclusion, no tricuspid valve repair was required in Group I (TR I).  For group II (TR II) patients, tricuspid annuloplasty was necessary and adequate for TR correction.  For Group II (TR III) patients, a more substantial procedure like tricuspid valve replacement should be performed, especially when the preoperative RVsp-RAv is less than or equal to 20 mmHg and tricuspid annular diameter at end-diastole is greater than or equal to 50 mm.
Surgical indication for aortic arch hypoplasia in infants.  To determine the surgical indications for aortic arch hypoplasia, the distal arch outer diameter, distal arch index (ratio of the distal arch diameter to the normal aortic ring diameter), and postoperative pressure gradient across the aortic arch were studied in 23 patients under 6 months of age who underwent surgery for coarctation and/or aortic arch hypoplasia.  The ratio of the pressure gradient across the arch to the right radial artery was used to evaluate the postoperative level of stenosis.  The maximum ratio of the pressure gradient that could be tolerated after surgery was considered to be 0.15 from the operative results.  Negative correlations were found between the distal arch outer diameter and postoperative pressure gradient ratio (r = 0.80), and the distal arch index and postoperative pressure gradient ratio (r = 0.80).  These correlations proved that in order to obtain a postoperative pressure gradient ratio of 0.15 or less, a distal arch outer diameter of 3.9 mm or more and a distal arch index of 0.63 or more were necessary.  Consequently, a distal arch outer diameter of 3.9 mm or a distal arch index of 0.63 is considered to indicate that aortic arch hypoplasia is in need of repair.
Annulo-aortic ectasia with DeBakey type II dissecting aneurysm in Gaucher's disease.  Annulo-aortic ectasia is an extremely rare complication of Gaucher's disease.  We report successful surgery in a patient with Gaucher's disease complicated by annulo-aortic ectasia and aortic dissection.  Cabrol's operation was accomplished without bleeding or sternal adaptation problems.
Repair of coarctation with persistent fifth arterial arch and atresia of the fourth aortic arch.  Coarctation of the aorta with persistent fifth arterial arch and atresia of the fourth aortic arch between the left common carotid and left subclavian arteries was treated surgically in a two-month-old boy with transposition of the great arteries and double-outlet right ventricle.  The aortic arch was repaired using side-to-side anastomosis of the left common carotid and left subclavian arteries, patch repair of the coarctated segment at the origin of the left subclavian artery, and ligation of the patent ductus arteriosus.  Pulmonary arterial banding and balloon atrioseptostomy were performed for associated anomalies.
The use of PTFE graft to correct anomalous drainage of persistent left superior vena cava.  A new technique to correct persistent left superior vena cava (LSVC) drainage into the left atrium is described in a 14-year-old patient with situs inversus, left atrial isomerism common atrium, and mitral valve regurgitation.  During surgery, occlusion of the LSVC markedly increased the venous pressure, precluding its ligation.  Because of the malposition of the heart and the unusual atrial anatomy, correction with an intra-atrial baffle was not attempted.  After correcting the intra-cardiac anomaly, the LSVC was divided and anastomosed to the "right" atrial appendage using a segment of PTFE graft.  The postoperative course was uneventful and an angiogram demonstrated excellent performance of the graft.
Rapid expression of heat shock protein in the rabbit after brief cardiac ischemia.  The effect of brief myocardial ischemia on the expression of heat shock protein (HSP 70) was examined in an in vivo rabbit model of myocardial ischemia using Northern blotting.  Functional studies were carried out in the open-chested anesthetized rabbit.  The large marginal branch of the left circumflex was occluded four times for 5 min.  Using piezoelectric crystals implanted midwall in the ischemic zone, end-diastolic length, end-systolic length, and percent segmental shortening were assessed.  Expression of HSP 70 was measured by Northern blotting.  A single 5-min coronary occlusion doubled the expression of HSP 70 whereas four cycles of 5 min of ischemia/5 min of reperfusion resulted in a threefold increase in HSP 70 mRNA (P less than 0.001).  Measurements with the piezoelectric crystals showed mild myocardial dysfunction concomitant with the increase in HSP 70.  This increase in HSP 70 mRNA after repetitive brief ischemia was transient, occurring as early as 1 h and returning to baseline by 24 h after ischemia.  Western blot analysis with a monoclonal antibody to HSP 70 was used to compare sham and postischemic myocardial HSP 70 levels.  Changes in the amount of HSP 70 were evident as early as 2 h and were even more striking at 24 h.
Payment mechanism and patterns of use of medical services: the example of hypertension.  This study explores the relationship between the use of medical services by hypertensive patients and mechanisms for payment within a single primary care practice.  Three payment mechanisms were explored: public assistance, a capitated health maintenance organization (HMO), and fee-for-service.  Patterns were examined across reimbursement type for the following variables: age, sex, visit reason, number of visits, medications, tests ordered, referrals made, and recommendations for follow-up visits.  Illness severity was controlled in two ways: (1) by the study being focused on one diagnosis--mild to moderate hypertension, and (2) by concurrent chronic illnesses being enumerated and included in the analysis.  Medical visits to the physician were examined over a 2-year period for 25 to 30 patients randomly sampled from each of the three payment mechanisms.  Statistically significant differences were found for patient behaviors (total number of patient visits) and physician behaviors (number of medications and recommendations for revisits).  The highest visit frequency was found for those on public assistance, followed closely by those covered by an HMO, and more distantly by those choosing fee-for-service.  In a climate of cost consciousness, further study is needed to explore the impact of reimbursement mechanisms on the use of health care services.
Association between post-dexamethasone cortisol level and blood pressure in depressed inpatients.  We examined the clinical data for 230 depressed inpatients who had completed a dexamethasone suppression test (DST) to determine whether those with an elevated post-DST serum cortisol level exhibited any of the classic physiological stigmata of Cushing's syndrome.  Hypertension was significantly more frequent among DST nonsuppressors (21.2%) than among normal suppressors (11.3%).  Percent blood lymphocyte count was significantly lower among nonsuppressors.  Confounders such as gender, age, body weight, and use of antihypertensives did not account for the findings.  Implications for morbidity and mortality rates among patients with affective disorder are discussed.
Free and peptide-bound amino acids as indicators of ischemic damage of the rabbit spinal cord.  The concentrations of free and peptide-bound amino acids aspartate (Asp), glutamate (Glu), glycine (Gly) and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) were studied following ischemia and recirculation in the ventral and dorsal gray matter of the rabbit spinal cord.  No changes in the concentration of amino acids following ten minutes (min) of ischemia and four days of recovery were found.  The most significant change after 20 min, and especially 40 min, of ischemia was a decrease in free Asp and GABA levels in both parts of the gray matter.  The relatively greater decrease in the concentration of free amino acids in the ventral horns corresponds with the greater morphological damage to this part of spinal cord following ischemia.  Following 40 min of ischemia and recirculation decrease in peptide-bound Glu in the ventral horns and Asp and Glu in the dorsal horns was found.
Selective vasopressin inhibition in rats with heart failure decreases afterload and results in venodilatation.  The hemodynamic effects of selective inhibition of arginine vasopressin (AVP) with a V1 antagonist, (CH2)5yreAVPa CL-1-4A, were studied in normal rats (n = 17) and in rats 4 weeks after coronary artery ligation with large myocardial infarctions and elevated left ventricular end-diastolic pressures (n = 22).  In normal rats AVP inhibition with a 35-micrograms/kg bolus of AVP V1 antagonist did not change heart rate, right atrial, left ventricular systolic, left ventricular end-diastolic or aortic pressures.  There were also no changes in mean circulatory filling pressure, unstressed vascular volume, blood volume or venous compliance.  In rats with infarction and elevated left ventricular end-diastolic pressures, AVP inhibition did not change heart rate, right atrial pressure, mean circulatory filling pressure or blood volume, but mean aortic pressure decreased from 103 +/- 3 to 88 +/- 2 mm Hg (P less than .001), venous compliance increased (P less than .001) from 2.17 +/- 0.07 to 3.04 +/- 0.11 ml/mm Hg/kg and unstressed vascular volume decreased from 42.3 +/- 3.1 to 34.7 +/- 2.6 ml/kg (P less than .05).  We conclude that inhibition of AVP with a specific V1 antagonist had no effect on the venous or arterial circulations in normal rats, but in rats with left ventricular dysfunction and heart failure after chronic myocardial infarction, AVP inhibition decreased arterial pressure and caused venodilatation.
Pharmacologic activity of bepafant (WEB 2170), a new and selective hetrazepinoic antagonist of platelet activating factor.  The hetrazepine WEB 2170 (international nonproprietary name: bepafant), a thieno-triazolodiazepine that is structurally related to the recently described platelet activating factor (PAF) antagonist WEB 2086, is a potent and selective PAF antagonist both in vitro and in vivo.  WEB 2170 inhibited PAF-induced human platelet and neutrophil aggregation in vitro (IC50 values: 0.3 and 0.83 microM, respectively) but had little or no inhibitory action against aggregation induced by other agonists.  The potency in vitro was comparable to that described recently for WEB 2086 (Casals-Stenzel, J., Muacevic, G.  and Weber, K.H.: J.  Pharmacol.  Exp.  Ther.  241: 974-981, 1987).  When guinea pigs were given i.v.  infusions of PAF at 30 ng x kg-1 x min-1, oral (0.005-0.5 mg/kg) as well as intravenous (0.005-0.05 mg/kg) treatment with WEB 2170 abrogated the intrathoracic accumulation of 111In-labeled platelets, the bronchoconstriction and the hypotension as well as the finally occurring death in a dose-dependent fashion.  Oral (0.01-1 mg/kg) and intravenous (0.005-0.1 mg/kg) WEB 2170 shared with the beta 2 agonist fenoterol and the steroid dexamethasone the property of protecting elderly NMRI mice from the lethal effect of PAF.  In anesthetized rats, intravenous (0.001-0.1 mg/kg) and oral (0.05-1 mg/kg) WEB 2170 inhibited PAF-induced hypotension in a dose-related manner.  Coadministration of WEB 2170 inhibited PAF-induced increase of vascular permeability in rat skin very effectively.  The half-time of duration of action in the rat was estimated to be about 5 to 6 h after oral administration and about 1.1 to 2.3 h after intravenous application.  In conclusion, the hetrazepine WEB 2170 is a strong and selective PAF antagonist, which is in vitro more or less equipotent to WEB 2086.  In contrast, in vivo oral WEB 2170 is--depending on the species and considered parameter--about 5 to 40 times more potent against exogenous PAF-induced alterations than the recently described hetrazepine WEB 2086.  Particularly in mice and rats, oral WEB 2170 is by far superior to WEB 2086.
Risk of angina pectoris and plasma concentrations of vitamins A, C, and E and carotene   The relation between risk of angina pectoris and plasma concentrations of vitamins A, C, and E and carotene was examined in a population case-control study of 110 cases of angina, identified by the Chest Pain Questionnaire, and 394 controls selected from a sample of 6000 men aged 35-54.  Plasma concentrations of vitamins C and E and carotene were significantly inversely related to the risk of angina.  There was no significant relation with vitamin A.  Smoking was a confounding factor.  The inverse relation between angina and low plasma carotene disappeared and that with plasma vitamin C was substantially reduced after adjustment for smoking.  Vitamin E remained independently and inversely related to the risk of angina after adjustment for age, smoking habit, blood pressure, lipids, and relative weight.  The adjusted odds ratio for angina between the lowest and highest quintiles of vitamin E concentrations was 2.68 (95% confidence interval 1.07-6.70; p = 0.02).  These findings suggest that some populations with a high incidence of coronary heart disease may benefit from eating diets rich in natural antioxidants, particularly vitamin E.
Blood pressure measurements during dental checkups representative of 26-hour registration.  The effect of dental checkups on blood pressure was investigated.  In 27 normotensive patients (13 men and 14 women) aged 22 to 64 years (mean 39.75 +/- 10.5 years), a 26-hour continuous, noninvasive blood pressure registration was carried out.  Of each patient at least 175 blood pressure measurements were registered during these 26 hours, giving a total amount of 4725 blood pressure measurements.  A dental checkup appointment with the family dentist was included.  Blood pressure values displayed the well-known diurnal variation, but the visit to the dental surgeon was not accompanied by a rise in blood pressure.  There was no significant difference between the blood pressure values during the 26-hour period and those during the checkup period.  During a rest period after the dental checkup, neither the systolic nor the diastolic pressure fell to any degree in relation to the 26-hour values or the visit to the surgeon.
Assessment of stable ischemic heart disease. Which tests are best for which patients?  An understanding of the importance of various risk factors, the pathogenesis of myocardial ischemia, and the appropriate use of various noninvasive and invasive tests is essential for management of patients with known or suspected coronary artery disease (CAD).  Although coronary angiography remains the "gold standard" for diagnosis of CAD, much of the data obtained from risk factor assessment, medical history, and various noninvasive tests provides information that may be even more important than cardiac catheterization data alone for defining prognosis and directing management.
Prevalence of hemodynamically significant stenosis of the carotid artery in an asymptomatic veteran population.  The results of previous studies have suggested that significant stenosis of the carotid artery occurs in less than 6 per cent of asymptomatic patients.  However, some populations studied were not representative of those seen by most vascular surgeons.  Accordingly, we examined two cohorts of patients at the Veterans Administration Medical Center using Duplex scanning.  There were 153 volunteers in group 1, all more than 50 years of age, who were being treated at our outpatient department for nonvascular problems.  There were 116 patients of similar age in group 2 but who were known to have significant arterial occlusive disease of the lower extremity.  The majority of patients were men with a mean age of 64.4 years.  Risk factors in the total population included hypertension, diabetes mellitus, coronary arterial disease, peripheral vascular disease and smoking.  Over-all, significant (greater than 50 per cent diameter) stenosis of the carotid artery was discovered in 25 of 269 patients.  The prevalence for those in group 1 was 6.5 per cent versus 12.9 per cent for those in group 2 (p = 0.058).  The prevalence in patients with cardiac disease was 15.2 per cent compared with 6.8 per cent in those without cardiac disease (p = 0.032).  Smoking was associated with a 10.6 per cent rate of significant disease compared with a 2.3 per cent rate in nonsmokers (p = 0.065).  Hypertension and diabetes were not significant risk factors.  Significant stenosis of the carotid artery was found in seven of 40 patients in whom coronary arterial disease, peripheral vascular disease and smoking were all present.
The syndrome of bilateral hemispheric border zone ischemia.  Symptoms compatible with vertebrobasilar ischemia have been reported in patients with unilateral or bilateral carotid occlusive disease.  Intracranial steal phenomena have been proposed to explain the symptoms.  In a review of 54 patients with angiographically documented severe bilateral carotid stenosis (less than or equal to 2 mm residual lumen) or occlusion, eight had symptoms suggesting vertebrobasilar insufficiency.  Five patients were identified retrospectively, and the other three were evaluated prospectively.  Symptoms included various combinations of hemodynamically mediated, transient bilateral motor, sensory, or visual impairment.  Dysarthria, dysphagia, and diplopia were generally absent.  Each patient also described additional symptoms compatible with transient hemispheric or retinal ischemia.  The anatomic regions subserving the bilateral vertebrobasilar-like symptoms could be correlated with angiographically estimated arterial border zones in both hemispheres and may thus represent bilateral hemispheric border zone ischemia rather than brain stem ischemia.  An intracranial steal need not be invoked.
Correlation between amino acid release and neuropathologic outcome in rat brain following middle cerebral artery occlusion.  Using in vivo brain microdialysis, we studied amino acid release in the striatum and cortex of eight rats following permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion.  We then processed all brains for histopathologic assessment of the volume of ischemic damage 4 hours after occlusion.  Ischemic damage was varied by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery at a point either proximal (n = 4) or distal (n = 4) to the lenticulostriate vessels.  Proximal occlusion elevated the dialysate contents of all amino acids.  The largest increases occurred for the potentially neurotoxic amino acids aspartate and glutamate and for taurine (800-2,800% of basal efflux).  We observed smaller increases for the "metabolic" amino acids (280-580% of basal efflux).  Distal occlusion did not affect amino acid efflux in the striatum, and release in the cortex was significantly lower than that following proximal occlusion.  We compared release data with acute histopathologic outcome.  Proximal occlusion resulted in a large volume of ischemic damage in the cortex and striatum (25-48% of hemispheric volume).  A smaller volume of ischemic damage was noted following distal occlusion (0-21% of hemispheric volume).  The volume of ischemic damage and the amount of amino acid release were significantly correlated (p less than 0.05).
Angiographic contrast media interference with laser-induced fluorescence excitation and detection in atherosclerotic human coronary arteries.  Laser-induced fluorescence has been used in conjunction with angiography for laser angioplasty guidance.  The effect of radiopaque contrast media on the excitation and detection of arterial fluorescence has not been previously reported.  Accordingly, fluorescence emission spectra from human coronary artery necropsy specimens (n = 7) during excitation with pulsed excimer laser excitation (308 nm) was examined before and after the addition of three different contrast media, sodium and meglumine diatrizoate, sodium and meglumine ioxaglate, and iopamidol.  A decrease in overall fluorescence intensity was observed at all wavelengths for each contrast agent examined.  The decrease in intensity of fluorescence emission was more marked at wavelengths less than 410 nm than at wavelengths above 425 nm.  Similar effects were observed for contrast media diluted with whole blood.  Absorption spectra for all three contrast media demonstrated absorption in the ultraviolet centered around 240 nm.  We conclude that preferential absorption in the ultraviolet range by contrast media interferes with the excitation and detection of laser-induced fluorescence; use of visible light excitation may obviate interference with laser-induced fluorescence analysis of plaque.
Normalization of Doppler indices of diastolic dysfunction during pacing is a sign of ischemic mitral regurgitation.  Twenty-three patients with angina who were undergoing diagnostic cardiac catheterization underwent cardiac pacing with simultaneous hemodynamic and Doppler echocardiographic evaluation to assess the effects of pacing-induced ischemic on mitral valve velocity.  Seventeen patients had significant coronary artery disease, and six patients had normal coronary arteries.  Doppler and hemodynamic measurements were performed at rest and immediately after pacing was discontinued to 91% +/- 7% of maximal predicted heart rate.  Seven patients experienced new or significant increases in severity of mitral regurgitation after pacing as revealed by Doppler examination.  This group had a significant increase (p = 0.007) in early but not in late peak filling velocities immediately after pacing was discontinued, with a resultant decrease in late to early ratios, which decreased from 1.01% +/- 0.12 to 0.70% +/- 0.19 (p = 0.006).  Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure increased significantly from 16.7% +/- 6.8 mm Hg to 29.4% +/- 5.3 mm Hg after cardiac pacing (p less than 0.001).  Patients with coronary disease who did not develop mitral regurgitation also had significant increases in left ventricular end-diastolic pressure from 18.7% +/- 5.8 mm Hg to 24.3% +/- 8.6 mm Hg (p less than 0.05).  There were no changes in late or early wave amplitude, late to early ratio, or other Doppler measurements in any of the other groups.  We conclude that mitral regurgitation caused by pacing-induced myocardial ischemia normalizes Doppler indices of mitral inflow, which in turn, may mask persistent or worsened left ventricular diastolic dysfunction.
Pulse rate, coronary heart disease, and death: the NHANES I Epidemiologic Follow-up Study.  To determine whether associations of elevated resting pulse rate with CHD incidence or death in white men are independent of other risk factors and whether such associations exist for women and blacks, data were examined from the NHANES I Epidemiologic Follow-up Study.  Over a follow-up period of 6 to 13 years, elevated RR for CHD incidence were found for older white men with baseline pulse greater than 84 beats/min compared with less than 74 beats/min after controlling multiple risk factors (RR = 1.37, 95% CL 1.02, 1.84).  Risks of death from all causes, cardiovascular diseases, and noncardiovascular diseases were also elevated for white men with elevated pulse rate independent of other risk factors.  CHD incidence was increased in white women with elevated pulse rate.  Risks of death from all causes, cardiovascular diseases, and noncardiovascular diseases, were also elevated for white men with elevated pulse rate independent of other risk factors.  CHD incidence was increased in white women with elevated pulse rate.  Risk of death from all causes and cardiovascular diseases was elevated in black men and women with elevated pulse rate.  Risk of death from noncardiovascular disease was elevated in black men with elevated pulse rate.  The association with cardiovascular death was particularly striking in black women, even after adjusting for baseline risk factors (RR 3.03, 95% CL 1.46, 6.28).  Further studies are needed to assess associations of pulse rate with CHD in blacks and to elucidate mechanisms in all groups.
The utility of echocardiography in the diagnostic strategy of postinfarction ventricular septal rupture: a comparison of two-dimensional echocardiography versus Doppler color flow imaging.  The diagnostic accuracy of Doppler color flow imaging in the diagnosis of postinfarction ventricular septal defects has not been established.  In this study, 43 patients with unexplained hypotension or a new murmur in the periinfarct period were evaluated with conventional two-dimensional echocardiography and Doppler color flow imaging.  The presence of a ventricular septal defect was confirmed by oximetry, ventriculography, operative repair, or autopsy in each case.  Both two-dimensional and Doppler color flow imaging were 100% specific in excluding a ventricular septal defect.  Doppler color flow imaging correctly identified the 12 confirmed ventricular septal defects in this study (100% sensitivity), whereas any combination of two-dimensional criteria only correctly identified seven (58% sensitive) (p less than 0.05).  Doppler color flow imaging is superior to conventional two-dimensional imaging in the diagnosis of a postinfarction ventricular septal defect.  In addition, Doppler color flow imaging localized the septal defect, and thus guided therapy and technique for repair.  Carefully performed Doppler color flow examination can exclude or result in the rapid diagnosis of a ventricular septal defect, which eliminates the need for further time-consuming confirmatory testing.
Dipyridamole perfusion scintigraphy: the experience with its application in one hundred seventy patients with known or suspected unstable angina.  We evaluated the safety, accuracy, and potential clinical utility of intravenous dipyridamole perfusion scintigraphy with thallium-201 in 170 patients, 78 with suspected and 92 with known unstable angina.  All had coronary angiography.  Noncardiac side effects (26%), induced chest discomfort (44%), and ST segment changes (12%) were similar in the two groups.  No significant arrhythmias occurred.  Two patients had prolonged chest pain, both with extensive reversible image abnormalities and associated creatinine kinase-MB release.  Both had elective bypass surgery.  Twenty-eight patients had normal coronary arteries, and 35 had single-vessel disease.  Scintigraphic per patient sensitivity and specificity were 91% and 79% with a per vessel sensitivity of 74% and a per vessel specificity of 78% without between-group differences.  During a brief follow-up period, 62 patients with image abnormalities had coronary revascularization, and there were seven deaths without intergroup differences.  In a similar patient group that did not have angiography, scintigraphic defects were less frequent and less extensive, revascularization was not performed, and subsequent deaths occurred less often.  Dipyridamole perfusion scintigraphy is an accurate alternative to exercise testing in the evaluation of patients with unstable angina pectoris.  Although not without risk, the method appears relatively safe and should be considered as a guide to diagnosis, and probably to prognosis and management.
Myocardial metabolic and hemodynamic effects of a sustained intravenous infusion of nifedipine with and without metoprolol in patients with unstable angina.  We tested the usefulness of a sustained intravenous infusion of nifedipine and a combination of nifedipine and metoprolol in the early management of 14 patients with unstable angina pectoris.  After a 24-hour run-in period, nifedipine was titrated in a stepwise fashion (mean dose 27 +/- 7 micrograms/min).  After nifedipine treatment coronary blood flow increased from 150 +/- 66 to 183 +/- 74 ml/min (p less than 0.05), whereas double product, myocardial oxygen consumption, and both arterial and coronary sinus (nor)epinephrine levels were unchanged.  Myocardial lactate uptake increased from 3.4 +/- 26.1 to 31.3 +/- 26.6 mumol/min (p less than 0.005) and free fatty acid uptake from 7.2 +/- 22.1 to 34.5 +/- 33.7 mumol/min (p less than 0.05).  A small nonsignificant improvement in amino acid metabolism was observed.  Metoprolol was added in seven patients and led to a decrease in double product (-2.2 +/- 1.6 x 10(3); p less than 0.01) and myocardial oxygen consumption (-3.2 +/- 3.8 ml/min; p less than 0.05).  The lactate uptake/oxygen uptake ratio increased by 18% after metoprolol (p = NS).  The number of episodes of chest pain decreased from 2.4 +/- 1.1/24 hours to 0.1 +/- 0.2 in the nifedipine group and from 2.9 +/- 1.1/24 hours to 0.3 +/- 0.5 in the nifedipine plus metoprolol group (both p less than 0.01).  We conclude that in the acute phase of unstable angina, intravenous nifedipine can be carefully titrated to improve coronary blood flow and oxidative metabolism.  The addition of metoprolol is also associated with a reduction in myocardial oxygen demand.  This treatment results in significant hemodynamic stability.
Fragmented atrial activity in patients with transient atrial fibrillation.  Prediction of atrial fibrillation (AF) is very important in patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome or in the selection of pacemaker therapeutic modality.  In 25 patients with transient AF, the response of the atrial activity width to extrastimuli was examined in comparison with 25 patients without AF to see if the results could be used as an index of subsequent occurrence of AF.  Programmed electrical stimulation using eight basic stimuli followed by single or double extrastimuli (P1P2 or P1P2P3) were delivered to the high right atrium, and the atrial activities were examined.  The prolongation of the atrial activity caused by extrastimuli was termed fragmentation (Frg), and it was defined as the prolongation of more than 150% of the basic stimuli.  Frg zone was defined as the zone of coupling intervals of the extrastimuli (P1P2 or P2P3) that caused Frg, and delta max Frg was defined as the difference between the widest Frg and the atrial wave width during basic stimuli.  Fragmentation was reproducibly induced by extrastimuli, and there was an inverse relationship between Frg duration and the coupling interval of the extrastimuli (P1P2 or P2P3).  Frg zone and delta max Frg were wider and longer in patients with transient AF in comparison with the control group for both single and double extrastimuli (p less than 0.001).  AF inducibility using double extrastimuli was significantly high in patients with AF.
Management of multiple risk factors for coronary heart disease in patients with hypertension.  Hypertension intervention trials, which have involved mainly the use of diuretics and beta-blockers, have demonstrated a disappointing benefit in terms of reduction of coronary heart disease (CHD).  Rather than suggesting that elevated blood pressure and CHD are not causally related, these data suggest that the antihypertensive agents used were not optimal for the management of hypertension and a review of the currently recommended therapies is needed.  Major risk factors for CHD, which include increased blood pressure, elevated serum cholesterol levels, and smoking, are highly prevalent in the general population and appear to cluster in patients with hypertension.  Therefore the treatment of hypertension demands a multifactorial approach, one that takes into consideration all the risk factors for CHD.  Diuretics and beta-blockers adversely affect the serum lipid profile, and this could negate some of the CHD benefit afforded by blood pressure reduction.
Effects of doxazosin on serum lipids: a review of the clinical data and molecular basis for altered lipid metabolism.  The goal of antihypertensive treatment must be not only the reduction of high blood pressure, but also the effective management of elevated cholesterol levels and other risk factors of coronary heart disease (CHD).  In controlled clinical trials, doxazosin has been shown to have antihypertensive efficacy comparable with other classes of antihypertensive agents and to lower the levels of total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, and triglycerides while increasing the levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol.  Doxazosin appears to inhibit the development of CHD on two fronts.  First, doxazosin binds to the alpha 1-adrenoreceptor and inhibits the receptor-mediated responses to epinephrine and norepinephrine.  Second, doxazosin has direct and indirect effects on lipid metabolism by increasing LDL receptor activity, decreasing intracellular LDL synthesis, reducing the synthesis and secretion of very low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and stimulating lipoprotein lipase activity.  Doxazosin may also inhibit platelet aggregation.  Long-term studies will determine how these actions translate into reductions in the morbidity and mortality rates of CHD.  First-year results from the Treatment of Mild Hypertension Study (TOMHS) have demonstrated expected reductions in blood pressure for all antihypertensive agents studied.  The lipid changes have varied with the type of antihypertensive treatment and have been favorable for doxazosin.
Preliminary results of the Norwegian doxazosin postmarketing surveillance study: a twelve-week experience.  The study was designed to investigate the safety and efficacy of doxazosin in the control of blood pressure in general medical practice; the results presented concern the first 748 patients evaluated over a 12-week period.  Blood pressure was significantly reduced after treatment with doxazosin (-13/-9 mm Hg), and heart rate was not significantly altered.  In addition, doxazosin significantly reduced total cholesterol levels (-6.7%), reduced triglyceride levels (-19.8%), increased high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels (+2.5%), and the high-density lipoprotein:total cholesterol ratio (+9.7%).  The calculated risk of coronary heart disease was reduced by 20.5% over a 12-week period.  Thirty-five percent of patients reported at least one side effect, and the number of patients experiencing severe adverse reactions was small.  Twenty patients (2.7%) discontinued treatment because of adverse events, and 2.7% had the dose of doxazosin reduced.
Doxazosin: a study in a cohort of patients with hypertension in general practice--an interim report.  The objective of this study was to assess the safety and efficacy of doxazosin in a substantial cohort of hypertensive patients drawn from general practice.  A total of 4027 patients entered the study, 1472 of whom (36.6%) were untreated hypertensive patients.  Patients were not advised to change diet, smoking habit, or life-style during the study.  Twenty-one percent were cigarette smokers, and concurrent diabetes was present in 2.3%.  Baseline blood cholesterol exceeded 200 mg/dl (5.2 mmol/L) in 90% and 250 mg/dl (6.5 mmol/L) in 56% of patients.  The mean decrease in blood pressure produced by doxazosin was 22/15 mm Hg after 10 weeks of therapy; there was a mean decrease in heart rate of 1 beat/min.  The mean maintenance dose for all patients was 3.1 mg/day.  Side effects considered related or possibly related to treatment were reported in 705 patients.  Treatment was discontinued in 233 patients (5.8%) because of adverse events related or possibly related to treatment with doxazosin.  Doxazosin produced a significant (p less than 0.001) decrease in total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and triglyceride levels and a significant increase in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and the ratio of high-density lipoprotein:total cholesterol.  The potential reduction in 10-year coronary heart disease risk (according to the Framingham equation) was calculated to be 20.4%.
An open, noncomparative study of doxazosin in essential hypertension: experience in general practice in The Netherlands.  The antihypertensive efficacy, safety, and lipid effects of doxazosin, a selective alpha 1-inhibitor, were assessed in a general practice setting.  Three hundred twenty-six patients were entered into the study, which involved three phases: (1) a 2-week baseline period, (2) an 8-week period in which patients received 1 to 8 mg of doxazosin once daily, and (3) a 4-week maintenance period.  After 12 weeks, 78.8% of efficacy-evaluable patients were considered therapy successes (sitting diastolic blood pressure either less than or equal to 90 mm Hg with greater than or equal to 5 mm Hg reduction from baseline or greater than or equal to 10 mm Hg reduction from baseline).  The mean daily dose in patients considered a therapy success was 2.8 mg.  By the final visit, sitting systolic/diastolic blood pressures of these patients were reduced by 16.4/13.5 mm Hg from a mean baseline of 170/106 mm Hg.  The investigators' global assessment of efficacy of once-daily doxazosin therapy was excellent or good for 70% of patients.  Of the 326 patients, 30.7% reported a total of 160 side effects; 78% of the side effects were mild or moderate in severity, and 24 patients (7.4%) discontinued treatment because of adverse experiences.  The investigators' global assessment of toleration was excellent or good for 87% of patients.  Doxazosin produced a significant decrease in total cholesterol (p = 0.02) and triglyceride (p less than 0.001) levels.  From baseline to final visit there was also a highly significant reduction of 17% (p less than 0.001) in calculated risk score for coronary heart disease on the basis of the Framingham Heart Study risk equation.
Doxazosin and atenolol as monotherapy in mild and moderate hypertension: a randomized, parallel study with a three-year follow-up.  The efficacy and safety of doxazosin (n = 83) and atenolol (n = 81) have been compared during a 3-year period.  Doxazosin (mean dose at 3 years, 5.2 mg/day) and atenolol (mean dose, 66.4 mg/day) produced a sustained and overall similar reduction in blood pressure, with no evidence of tolerance.  Doxazosin decreased mean blood pressure from 158/104 mm Hg to 146/90 mm Hg; with atenolol the decrease was from 160/103 mm Hg to 144/88 mm Hg.  Whereas the reduction in blood pressure with atenolol was paralleled by a significant (p less than 0.05) decrease in heart rate (from a mean of 74 to 60 beats/min), doxazosin produced no clinically meaningful changes in heart rate.  In contrast to atenolol, doxazosin reduced triglyceride levels by -5.9% (atenolol +22.5%), increased high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels by +3.7% (atenolol, -11.2%), and increased the high-density lipoprotein/total cholesterol ratio by +5.9% (atenolol, -10.3%); all of these values were significantly (p less than 0.001) different from those of atenolol-treated patients.  Doxazosin also reduced the calculated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels by -3.3% (atenolol, unchanged).  The adverse effect of atenolol on lipid levels apparently negated any beneficial effect of blood pressure reduction, because the calculated coronary heart disease (CHD) risk actually increased significantly.  In contrast, the reduction in calculated CHD risk in the doxazosin group was statistically significant at all points during the study.  The safety profile of the drugs was similar.  With the added potential of the reduction in the calculated risk of CHD among hypertensive patients,doxazosin represents an appropriate first-line drug for the treatment of essential hypertension.
Cardiovascular disease risk profiles.  This article presents prediction equations for several cardiovascular disease endpoints, which are based on measurements of several known risk factors.  Subjects (n = 5573) were original and offspring subjects in the Framingham Heart Study, aged 30 to 74 years, and initially free of cardiovascular disease.  Equations to predict risk for the following were developed: myocardial infarction, coronary heart disease (CHD), death from CHD, stroke, cardiovascular disease, and death from cardiovascular disease.  The equations demonstrated the potential importance of controlling multiple risk factors (blood pressure, total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, smoking, glucose intolerance, and left ventricular hypertrophy) as opposed to focusing on one single risk factor.  The parametric model used was seen to have several advantages over existing standard regression models.  Unlike logistic regression, it can provide predictions for different lengths of time, and probabilities can be expressed in a more straightforward way than the Cox proportional hazards model.
Double-blind comparison of doxazosin and enalapril in patients with mild or moderate essential hypertension.  The antihypertensive efficacy and safety of doxazosin and enalapril were compared in the general practice setting (n = 54).  Both agents produced comparable, statistically significant (p less than 0.05) reductions in mean blood pressure with no clinically relevant changes in heart rate.  Side effects in the two groups were mild or moderate and disappeared or were tolerated with continued treatment.  Doxazosin, in contrast to enalapril, produced a significant (p less than 0.05) reduction in the total serum cholesterol concentration, a reduction in the level of triglycerides, and a favorable increase in the high-density lipoprotein/total cholesterol ratio.  The reduction in calculated coronary heart disease risk produced by doxazosin (-27.58%) was highly significant (p less than 0.0002) and greater than that produced by enalapril (-18.49% p less than 0.02).
A double-blind comparative study of doxazosin and prazosin when administered with beta-blockers or diuretics.  The antihypertensive efficacy and safety of doxazosin (once daily) and prazosin (twice daily) were compared in patients with mild or moderate essential hypertension (diastolic blood pressure [DBP] 95 to 114 mm Hg) not adequately controlled by diuretics and beta-blockers.  Doxazosin produced significantly greater mean reductions in standing (p = 0.01) and supine (p = 0.04) DBP than did prazosin; there were no significant between-group differences in either mean systolic blood pressure or heart rate.  The overall mean daily doses for efficacy-evaluable patients were 4.7 mg of doxazosin and 6.7 mg of prazosin.  Sixteen patients (84.2%) treated with doxazosin and 13 patients (56.5%) treated with prazosin were considered therapeutic successes (decrease in standing DBP greater than or equal to 10 mm Hg or to less than or equal to 90 mm Hg with greater than or equal to 5 mm Hg reduction from baseline).  Of the 19 efficacy-evaluable patients treated with doxazosin, 15 (78.9%) showed improvement in the severity category of hypertension; an improvement in severity was reported in 14 patients (60.9%) treated with prazosin.  Doxazosin produced a more favorable effect on serum lipid levels than did prazosin, although no statistically significant within- or between-group differences were observed.  Most side effects experienced with either doxazosin or prazosin were mild or moderate and were tolerated or disappeared with continued treatment.  The overall evaluation of toleration was excellent or good for 18 (90%) doxazosin- and 21 (91%) prazosin-treated patients.  Clinical efficacy was rated as excellent or good for 16 patients (80%) treated with doxazosin and 15 patients (68%) treated with prazosin.
The addition of doxazosin to the treatment regimen of patients with hypertension not adequately controlled by beta-blockers.  When doxazosin was given to patients with hypertension not adequately controlled by beta-blockade, blood pressure was normalized in 94% of the 34 patients (blood pressure less than or equal to 140/85 mm Hg).  This reduction in blood pressure was obtained with doxazosin in combination with metoprolol or oxprenolol at a mean final daily dose of 1.3 mg or pindolol or atenolol at 2.0 mg/day.  Exercise-induced increase in systolic and diastolic blood pressure was also lower with combined beta-blocker and doxazosin therapy than with beta-blocker alone.  After 12 weeks of treatment, the combination of doxazosin and beta-blocker significantly reduced total serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels.  All side effects were mild and only one patient was withdrawn from therapy.
A double-blind comparative study of doxazosin and prazosin in the treatment of essential hypertension.  Two hundred sixty-six patients took part in a multicenter comparative study of doxazosin and prazosin.  Both drugs produced a significant reduction (p less than 0.001) in blood pressure and no increase in heart rate.  Blood pressure was considered "markedly decreased" or "decreased" in 70.8% of patients treated with doxazosin and 70.0% of patients treated with prazosin.  No statistically significant between-group differences in antihypertensive efficacy were observed.  Both doxazosin and prazosin were well tolerated; seven patients (5.6%) in each group had the therapy withdrawn.
Clinical experience with doxazosin in general medical practice in New Zealand.  This study investigated the safety and efficacy of doxazosin treatment in a large population of patients (n = 336) with essential hypertension and assessed the effect of doxazosin on the serum lipid profile and the calculated risk of developing coronary heart disease.  Patients were assigned to two groups: those with a baseline diastolic blood pressure greater than or equal to 95 mm Hg (group 1) and those with a baseline diastolic blood pressure less than 95 mm Hg (group 2) that was controlled by previous antihypertensive therapy.  Doxazosin treatment (monotherapy in 76.2% of patients) significantly (p less than 0.05) reduced the blood pressure of patients in group 1 (-23/-17 mm Hg) after 10 weeks and maintained the control of blood pressure for patients in group 2.  Heart rate was essentially unchanged in both groups.  Mean final daily doses of 3.6 and 3.2 mg were achieved in groups 1 and 2, respectively.  Treatment with doxazosin improved the severity category of hypertension for 88.4% of patients in group 1; 87.3% of patients were considered a therapy success.  Doxazosin had a favorable effect on the serum lipid profile in both groups of patients.  The majority of lipid changes achieved statistical significance and resulted in a significant 27% decrease in the calculated risk of developing coronary heart disease.  Doxazosin was well tolerated; only 24.1% of patients had side effects that were related or possibly related to treatment.  In nine (2.7%) patients the dose of doxazosin was reduced and 26 (7.7%) patients withdrew from doxazosin therapy because of side effects.
Doxazosin in the treatment of essential hypertension in general medical practice in Latin America.  This Latin American study assessed in the general practice setting the efficacy and tolerance of once-daily doxazosin in the treatment of mild or moderate essential hypertension (sitting diastolic blood pressure, 95 to 115 mm Hg).  Patients (n = 220) were treated with doxazosin for 12 weeks as monotherapy or in combination with other antihypertensive agents.  At the final visit, doxazosin produced a mean change in sitting systolic/diastolic blood pressure of -18.4/-14.4 mm Hg, at a mean daily dose of 4.3 mg.  One hundred sixty-three (77.6%) of the 210 evaluable patients were considered a therapeutic success.  Lipid analyses identified a statistically significant (p = 0.02) reduction in total serum cholesterol (4.85%) and an overall decrease in triglyceride levels (5.12%).  According to the Framingham Heart Study equation, doxazosin produced a highly significant (p less than 0.001) 20% reduction in the calculated probability of developing coronary heart disease in 10 years.  Of the 220 patients evaluated, 54 (24.5%) reported side effects that were considered related to treatment.  Ten (4.5%) patients reported side effects unrelated to treatment and 37 (16.8%) reported events of unknown relationship.  Most side effects were mild or moderate and were tolerated or disappeared with continued treatment.  Nine patients (4.1%) were discontinued from therapy and in 13 (5.9%) the dose was reduced.  The most prevalent side effects were headache and dizziness.  The investigator's overall assessment of antihypertensive efficacy was excellent or good for 176 patients (80.4%); tolerance was considered excellent or good in 193 patients (88.5%).
A multicenter study of doxazosin in the treatment of essential hypertension in France.  This study was designed to assess the efficacy and tolerance of doxazosin in patients with mild, moderate, or severe essential hypertension in a general practice setting.  Ninety-six adults of a mean age of 55 1/2 years took part in the 14-week study, consisting of a placebo phase (2 weeks), a dose-adjustment phase with doxazosin (8 weeks), and a maintenance phase (4 weeks).  Doxazosin, at a final mean daily dose of 3.4 mg, produced a significant (p less than 0.05) reduction in blood pressure at all points of measurement during the study.  The mean change in sitting blood pressure at the end of treatment was -15.4/-15.8 mm Hg.  Of the 85 patients who could be categorized as a success or failure, 78 (92%) were considered a therapeutic success; 78 (89%) of the 88 efficacy-evaluable patients demonstrated an improvement in the severity category of their hypertension.  Treatment with doxazosin produced a reduction in serum cholesterol (-3.1%) and triglyceride (-3.8%) levels, although these changes did not attain statistical significance.  The calculated probability of developing coronary heart disease in 10 years (according to the Framingham equation) was significantly (p less than 0.001) reduced by 22%, from 16.7 chances per 100 (baseline) to 14.3 chances per 100 (final visit).  Twenty-six patients (27.1%) reported side effects that were possibly related to treatment, the most prevalent of which were vertigo (7.3%) and headache (6.3%).  In four (4.2%) patients the dose of doxazosin was reduced and two (2.1%) were withdrawn prematurely.  The investigator's assessments of tolerance was reduced and two (2.1%) were considered to be excellent or good in 85 (88%) patients.
Clinical experience with doxazosin in general medical practice in The Netherlands.  This study was designed to investigate the efficacy and toleration of once-daily doxazosin in the treatment of essential hypertension (sitting diastolic blood pressure 95 to 115 mm Hg) in a general medical practice.  Fifty-three patients with mild or moderate essential hypertension entered a study of 14 weeks' duration.  This consisted of a baseline run-in period of 2 weeks, a dose-adjustment phase with doxazosin (8 weeks), and a maintenance phase of 4 weeks.  Doxazosin was initiated at 1 mg/day, and every 2 weeks the dose was doubled unless blood pressure was normalized (sitting diastolic blood pressure less than or equal to 90 mm Hg with greater than or equal to 5 mm Hg reduction from baseline) or significant side effects emerged.  The maximum daily dose administered was 8 mg.  Doxazosin produced a significant (p less than 0.05) final mean change in sitting blood pressure of -17.4/-12.2 mm Hg at a final mean daily dose of 4.1 mg.  Heart rate was not significantly altered.  A nonsignificant decrease in total cholesterol concentration (-2.66%, p = 0.06) and triglycerides (-8.80%, p = 0.09) was also observed.  The effect of doxazosin on blood pressure and serum cholesterol resulted in a significant (p less than 0.001) reduction of 19% in calculated risk of coronary heart disease.  The investigators' assessment of patient toleration of doxazosin was excellent or good in 86.8% of patients.
A long-term study of doxazosin in the treatment of mild or moderate essential hypertension in general medical practice.  This study assessed the long-term (54 weeks) antihypertensive efficacy and safety of doxazosin in the treatment of mild or moderate essential hypertension, defined as sitting and standing diastolic blood pressure of 95 to 114 mm Hg.  Of the 153 patients who successfully completed an initial 14-week trial, 61 continued uninterrupted into a 40-week extension study.  Optimal antihypertensive efficacy was achieved by week 12 and maintained in all patients for the duration of 1 year.  The final mean sitting blood pressure was 148/84 mm Hg and was reduced from a mean baseline level of 173/102 mm Hg.  Occasional decreases in heart rate were observed, but these were not considered to be clinically relevant (1 to 3 beats/min).  The mean final dose of doxazosin for patients evaluable for efficacy was 2.4 mg/day; 91.7% of patients were taking less than or equal to 4 mg/day.  No increase in daily maintenance dose was observed from the initial phase to the long-term extension study.  After 1 year of treatment, 93.3% of patients were considered a therapeutic success (sitting diastolic blood pressure greater than or equal to 10 mm Hg reduction from baseline or less than or equal to 90 mm Hg with greater than or equal to 5 mm Hg reduction).  In no patients was there a worsening in the severity category of the hypertension.  Total serum cholesterol concentrations were reduced significantly (6.6% p = 0.03) at the end of week 14.  Reductions in total serum cholesterol levels persisted throughout the extension study, with a final reduction of 5.4%.
Doxazosin in the treatment of mild or moderate essential hypertension: an echocardiographic study.  Sixteen patients with mild or moderate essential hypertension received 1 to 8 mg/day of doxazosin (mean daily dose, 2.7 mg).  Blood pressure reduction (supine and standing) was highly significant (p less than 0.001), and no significant changes in heart rate were observed.  A significant reduction (p less than 0.01) in left ventricular mass was seen without a change in left ventricular systolic function.  All side effects were mild, and only one patient withdrew from the study.
Echocardiographic assessment of doxazosin on left ventricular mass in patients with essential hypertension.  A single daily dose of doxazosin taken during a 12-week period produced a significant reduction in blood pressure and left ventricular mass index in patients with mild or moderate hypertension.  The systolic shortening coefficient was also increased and a trend in the improvement of ejection fraction, rate of circumferential fiber shortening, systolic contraction time, and preejective/ejective ratio was observed.  No change in heart rate was recorded and no patients had side effects.  The serum lipid profile was modified favorably, particularly with regard to the low-density lipoprotein cholesterol/high-density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio.  By producing a reduction in blood pressure and left ventricular mass while favorably modifying the serum lipid profile, doxazosin produced a beneficial change in the overall coronary heart disease risk profile.
Efficacy and safety of doxazosin in the treatment of patients with mild or moderate essential hypertension and elevated levels of cholesterol.  In hypertensive patients, elevated serum cholesterol is a frequent and sinister additional coronary risk factor.  Selective alpha 1-adrenoreceptor inhibitors appear to have the unique ability to control both risk factors.  Forty-two patients, ages 42 to 65 years, including 21 men with sustained hypertension and elevated serum cholesterol levels, were included in a trial of monotherapy with doxazosin administered once daily (range, 1 to 16 mg).  The influence of the drug on high blood pressure and elevated serum cholesterol was evaluated over a 28-week period, which consisted of a 4-week, single-blind placebo lead-in period, an open 10-week dose-adjustment period, and finally a 14-week maintenance period.  Of the 39 efficacy-evaluable patients, 25 (64%) achieved adequate blood pressure control (diastolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg or a decrease in diastolic blood pressure greater than 10 mm Hg) at a mean daily dose of 2 mg of doxazosin.  No persistent changes occurred in heart rate.  In the 32 patients with evaluable lipid data, there were nonsignificant trends to an increase in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and a reduction in total cholesterol, together with a significant reduction in serum triglyceride concentration.  The combined changes in blood pressure and blood lipid levels resulted in a reduction of 36% in the calculated risk of coronary heart disease.  Eleven patients reported side effects and four were withdrawn from therapy.  These results confirm the antihypertensive and anticholesterolemic efficacy of once-daily treatment with doxazosin.
A multicenter study of doxazosin in the treatment of patients with mild or moderate essential hypertension and concomitant intermittent claudication.  This study assessed the efficacy and safety of once-daily doxazosin in the treatment of patients (n = 19) with mild or moderate essential hypertension (sitting diastolic blood pressure [DBP] 95 to 114 mm Hg) and concomitant intermittent claudication (Doppler ankle/arm ratio of less than 0.80 and walking tolerance of less than 700 m on the treadmill).  After 14 weeks of treatment with doxazosin, a significant (p less than 0.05) reduction in systolic blood pressure and DBP was observed.  Mean blood pressures were reduced from 170/100 mm Hg at baseline to 161/93 mm Hg at the end of treatment.  Minor changes in heart rate occurred, which with continued treatment were not statistically significant from baseline.  In 12 of 16 (75.0%) efficacy-evaluable patients blood pressure was normalized (DBP to less than or equal to 90 mm Hg with an greater than or equal to 5 mm Hg reduction from baseline) with a mean daily dose of 7.6 mg/day.  Doxazosin improved the hypertension severity category in 13 of 16 (81.3%) patients.  The blood pressure ratios between both the thighs and arms and ankles and arms showed no statistically significant changes after treatment with doxazosin.  Thigh blood flow at rest and the reactive hyperemia after 3 minutes of arterial occlusion did not change statistically.  There was a tendency for pain-free distance to improve.  Laboratory data were not significantly changed after treatment with doxazosin.  Of the 19 patients studied, 5 reported mild or moderate side effects that were either tolerated or disappeared with continued treatment.  No patient had therapy withdrawn and no patient required a dose reduction.
Doxazosin for the treatment of chronic congestive heart failure: results of a randomized double-blind and placebo-controlled study.  In this study we evaluated the effects of once-daily administration of oral doxazosin in patients with chronic congestive heart failure (CHF).  After a stabilization period of at least 2 weeks with digitalis and diuretics, 73 patients with chronic CHF were randomized to receive additionally either doxazosin or placebo in double-blind fashion.  Patients underwent weekly dose adjustments with increasing doses of doxazosin (1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 mg daily) or placebo for 5 weeks, and 67 were evaluated for 12 additional weeks on maximally tolerated doses of blinded study drugs.  Treatment groups were evaluated with respect to symptoms of heart failure, indexes of quality of life and left ventricular function, frequency and type of arrhythmia, adverse events, and mortality rates.  Doxazosin (11.9 +/- 0.9 mg) given once daily produced a favorable trend in the investigators' and patients' assessments of symptomatic change.  Doxazosin was associated with a significantly higher level of voluntary submaximal exercise and a favorable trend on left ventricular ejection fraction (increase of 9.8% of the baseline value vs 2.7% with placebo; p = NS).  During the 3-month steady-dosing period, patients treated with doxazosin had a significant (p less than 0.004) reduction in ventricular arrhythmias and significantly fewer morbid and mortal cardiac events (including episodes of worsening heart failure severe enough to prompt discontinuation of the study, myocardial infarction, and death).  Doxazosin was well tolerated, producing no major side effects and only a slightly higher frequency of minor treatment-related side effects compared with placebo (p = NS).
The effect of doxazosin on platelet aggregation in normotensive subjects and patients with hypertension: an in vitro study.  An in vitro assay was used to investigate the effects of doxazosin on the platelet aggregation induced by epinephrine, collagen, and adenosine diphosphate.  Platelet-rich plasma from normotensive subjects and patients with hypertension was compared.  Doxazosin produced a concentration-dependent inhibition of platelet aggregation in both groups, but significantly lower concentrations were required to inhibit platelet aggregation in plasma taken from patients with hypertension.  The concentrations of doxazosin that inhibited platelet aggregation in vitro were similar to those that are used clinically to control blood pressure in patients with hypertension.
Evidence of an antiplatelet aggregation action of doxazosin in patients with hypertension: an ex vivo study.  Eighteen patients with a mean age of 54.7 years were included in the study.  All patients had a diagnosis of mild or moderate essential hypertension (sitting diastolic blood pressure of 96 to 114 mm Hg).  The study design was single blind and in two phases: phase I, placebo (4 weeks), and phase II, the active treatment (8 weeks) with increasing doses, if needed, of doxazosin every 2 weeks (1, 2, 4, and 8 mg/day).  Results show that doxazosin has an antihypertensive effect that is dose dependent.  Systolic, diastolic, and mean blood pressures were decreased significantly, and no effect on heart rate was observed.  Doxazosin significantly inhibited the platelet aggregation induced by epinephrine, adenosine diphosphate, and collagen in a dose-dependent manner.  In addition, treatment with doxazosin lowered total serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels, without changing other standard biochemical parameters.  This indicates that doxazosin could offer a distinct therapeutic advantage in the modulation of atherogenic and thromboembolic factors associated with coronary heart disease.
Role of oxygen free radicals in ischemic and reperfused myocardium.  In recent years there has been considerable interest concerning the role of oxygen radicals in myocardial ischemia and reperfusion injury.  The sequential univalent reduction of oxygen gives rise to very reactive intermediate products.  Normally, the tissue concentration of these intermediate products of oxygen is limited and the aerobic myocardium survives because of the existence of a delicate balance between the generation of the various oxidants and the maintenance of the antioxidant defense mechanism.  Several possible sources have been identified for the production of active oxygen species after ischemia and reperfusion and these sources may be mutually interactive.  The ability of scavengers of oxygen free radicals, including vitamin E, to improve mechanical, mitochondrial, and sarcoplasmic reticulum function in animal models of ischemic-reperfusion injury also suggests that oxygen free radicals are partly responsible for myocardial damage in these models, although caution in the interpretation of these data is necessary.
Inverse correlation between plasma vitamin E and mortality from ischemic heart disease in cross-cultural epidemiology.  Essential antioxidants were determined in plasma of middle-aged men representing 16 European study populations, which differed sixfold in age-specific mortality from ischemic heart disease (IHD).  In 12 populations with "common" plasma cholesterol (5.7-6.2 mmol/L) and blood pressure, both classical risk factors lacked significant correlations to IHD mortality, whereas absolute levels of vitamin E (alpha-tocopherol) showed a strong inverse correlation (r2 = 0.63, P = 0.002).  Evaluating all populations, cholesterol and diastolic blood pressure were moderately associated, but their correlation was inferior to that of vitamin E.  In stepwise regression and multiple regression analysis, mortality was predictable to 62% by lipid-standardized vitamin E, to 79% by vitamin E and cholesterol, to 83% after inclusion of lipid-standardized vitamin A (retinol), and to 87% by all the above parameters plus blood pressure.  Thus, in the present study the cross-cultural differences of IDH mortality are primarily attributable to plasma status of vitamin E, which might have protective functions.
On the inheritance of abdominal aortic aneurysm.  To determine the mode of inheritance of abdominal aortic aneurysm, data on first-degree relatives of 91 probands were collected.  Results of segregation analysis performed on these data are reported.  Many models, including nongenetic and genetic models, were compared using likelihood methods.  The nongenetic model was rejected; statistically significant evidence in favor of a genetic model was found.  Among the many genetic models compared, the most parsimonious genetic model was that susceptibility to abdominal aortic aneurysm is determined by a recessive gene at an autosomal diallelic major locus.  A multifactorial component in addition to the major locus does not increase the likelihood of the data significantly.
Chronic therapy for congestive heart failure with benazepril HCl, a new angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor.  Benazepril HCl is an orally effective angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor previously shown to have significant acute hemodynamic benefits in patients with congestive heart failure.  In this study, 21 patients with New York Heart Association Class III or IV congestive heart failure were treated with 2 to 15 mg of benazepril HCl as a single daily oral dose for 28 days to determine the clinical and hemodynamic value of chronic therapy.  Each patient underwent clinical evaluation during the 28-day period, as well as invasive hemodynamic studies on the first two and last two days of the trial.  Plasma ACE activity and aldosterone levels fell significantly and renin levels rose after therapy.  Benazepril HCl produced significant (p less than 0.01) reductions in arterial pressure and systemic vascular resistance, with corresponding increases in cardiac output and decreases in pulmonary artery wedge pressure.  Responses after 28 days of therapy were equivalent to those after the initial doses.  Clinical effects included reduced rest, exertional and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, as well as reduced peripheral edema.  Only one patient developed symptomatic orthostatic hypotension.  Thus, benazepril HCl, given once daily, is an effective and well tolerated oral agent for the chronic treatment of advanced congestive heart failure.
Cardiorespiratory effects of antagonism of diazepam sedation with flumazenil in patients with cardiac disease.  The specific benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil is currently under intense study.  Despite much clinical experience, no detailed invasive hemodynamic studies of its use in cardiac patients have been published.  In the present study, hemodynamic and respiratory variables were measured in 10 cardiac patients undergoing catheterization of the right and left sides of the heart, before and after sedation with intravenous diazepam, and after reversal of sedation with flumazenil.  A sleep dose of diazepam (12.2 +/- 5.1 mg, mean +/- SD) caused only slight decreases in mean arterial pressure (103 +/- 12 to 98 +/- 14 mm Hg; P less than 0.05), pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (13.2 +/- 6.3 to 11.7 +/- 6.6 mm Hg; P less than 0.05), and left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (20.8 +/- 7.5 to 17.3 +/- 10.0 mm Hg; P less than 0.05), with no significant changes in respiratory gas homeostasis.  Intravenous flumazenil (0.22 +/- 0.07 mg) resulted in spontaneous awakening and return to full orientation, yet caused no significant alteration in either hemodynamic or respiratory variables measured.  Reversal of diazepam-induced sedation by flumazenil in cardiac patients appears safe and effective.
Surgical repair of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome complicated with myocardial bridging.  Myocardial bridging causes myocardial ischemia during supraventricular tachycardia.  We present a case of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome combined with myocardial bridging.  The patient complained of angina pectoris during paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia because of severe constriction of the left anterior descending coronary artery during systole.  A myocardial scintigram revealed myocardial ischemia in the anteroseptal wall during paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia.  Myotomy to prevent myocardial bridging and interruption of the accessory conduction pathway was successfully accomplished in a one-stage operation.
Alternative technique for repair of sinus venosus atrial septal defect.  A technique is described for closure of a sinus venosus atrial septal defect using a single patch held in place by sutures placed from outside the right atrium and underneath the superior vena cava.  The superior vena cava does not require enlargement and potential damage to the artery to the sinoatrial node is avoided.
Comparison of supraannular and subannular pledgeted sutures in mitral valve replacement   Ten fresh canine hearts were used to compare the peak left ventricular pressure required to disrupt prosthetic mitral valves sutured in place with horizontal mattress sutures with either subannular or supraannular pledgets.  Each group consisted of 5 animals.  A 29-mm Medtronic mitral valve was secured in the mitral position with ten pledgeted sutures.  The aorta was cannulated and normal saline solution was infused into the left ventricle until valvar disruption occurred.  The peak pressure and the location and mechanism of disruption were then noted.  At the peak left ventricular pressure required for valvar disruption, no individual sutures were broken.  Instead, in all specimens a subannular myocardial rupture occurred in the posterior portion of the mitral annulus along the extent of the atrioventricular groove.  In addition, the posterior wall of the left atrium dissected upward subsequently.  Significantly greater pressures were required in the group with subannular suture placement as compared with the supraannular group (354 +/- 37 versus 236 +/- 33 mm Hg; p less than 0.0007).  These data suggest that placement of horizontal mattress sutures with pledgets in the subannular position is superior to the currently recommended method of supraannular suture placement in mechanical valves.
Does cholesterol screening result in negative labeling effects? Results of the Massachusetts Model Systems for Blood Cholesterol Screening Project.  Several previous studies that looked at the effects of labeling individuals as hypertensive found increases in psychosocial distress, diminished feelings of well-being, or absenteeism.  Other studies found no such effects.  Thus far, similar studies relating to labeling for high blood cholesterol levels have not been published.  The Massachusetts Model Systems for Blood Cholesterol Screening Project investigated whether labeling effects occurred as a result of the community-based screening, education, and referral programs it conducted in Worcester and Lowell.  Nine questions concerning perceptions of physical and psychological well-being were asked on a questionnaire given to screening participants.  The same questions were asked as part of a follow-up questionnaire given to all individuals identified as having high blood cholesterol levels at one of the screenings.  Comparison of the baseline and follow-up results did not demonstrate significant overall negative effects among any age, sex, racial, income, or educational groups.  On the contrary, responses to many of the questions revealed small but statistically significant improvements in perceptions of physical and psychological well-being.  The absence of negative labeling effects may be attributable to the positive, supportive approach to participant counseling taken by the project.
Weight gain at the time of menopause.  We studied prospectively the weight change and the effect of weight change on changes in coronary heart disease risk factors in a population-based sample of 485 middle-aged women.  All women were studied first in 1983 to 1984, when they were premenopausal and aged 42 to 50 years, and then restudied in 1987.  Women gained an average of 2.25 +/- 4.19 kg during this 3-year period; 20% of women gained 4.5 kg or more, and only 3% lost 4.5 kg or more.  There were no significant differences in weight gain of women who remained premenopausal and those who had a natural menopause (+2.07 kg vs +1.35 kg).  Weight gain was significantly associated with increases in blood pressure and levels of total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, triglycerides, and fasting insulin.  Weight gain is thus a common occurrence for women at the time of menopause and is related to the changes in coronary heart disease risk factors observed during this period.  Efforts to lose weight or to prevent weight gain may help to mitigate the worsening in coronary heart disease risk factors in middle-aged women.
Lipoprotein-related coronary risk factors in patients with angiographically defined coronary artery disease: relation to number of stenosed arteries.  To determine whether an index estimating antagonism between low density lipoprotein (LDL) and high density lipoprotein (HDL) would improve separation between groups with and without coronary artherosclerosis, patients undergoing coronary catheterization (35 women and 99 men) were analysed for total cholesterol (TC), HDL cholesterol (HDLc), apolipoprotein A (apo A) and apolipoprotein B (apo B).  The subjects were categorized as groups 0, 1, 2 or 3 according to the number of stenosed arteries (greater than 75% areal stenosis).  Thirty of the patients showed no significant coronary atherosclerosis (group 0).  Serum apo B and TC concentrations were directly related to the number of stenosed vessels, whereas the concentrations of apo A and HDLc were negatively correlated with the number of stenosed arteries.  An 'atherogenic Index' (ATH index) calculated as the product of serum concentrations of apo B, and TC minus HDLc divided by the product of apo A and HDLc, proved more satisfactory than individual lipoprotein components for discrimination between subjects with and without stenosis.  Accordingly, identification of coronary groups may be improved by using the ATH index.
Effects of long-term treatment with metoprolol and hydrochlorothiazide on plasma lipids and lipoproteins.  In order to evaluate the effects of one-year antihypertensive treatment on plasma lipids and lipoproteins, 65 patients whose diastolic blood pressure was in the range 95-120 mmHg were randomly allocated to groups that received either hydrochlorothiazide or metoprolol, or both drugs when the response to one of them was insufficient to control blood pressure.  Blood pressure was effectively reduced in all groups.  Patients on hydrochlorothiazide showed a significant increase (P less than 0.01) in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) after 3 months of treatment.  A significant increase in triglycerides was observed after 6 and 12 months, together with a decrease in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) after 12 months (P less than 0.05) of treatment in patients on metoprolol.  In patients treated with both hydrochlorothiazide and metoprolol, total cholesterol increased after 3 (P less than 0.001) and 6 months (P less than 0.05), triglycerides increased after 6 (P less than 0.01) and 12 months (P less than 0.01), and LDL-C increased after 3 (P less than 0.05), 6 (P less than 0.001) and 12 months (P less than 0.01) of treatment, respectively.  In 61% of the patients, three or more lipid parameters were affected during the study period.  We conclude that long-term antihypertensive treatment with hydrochlorothiazide, metoprolol, and particularly with both drugs, can induce lipid effects that deserve recognition, because in some cases these might counteract the possible benefit of a reduction in blood pressure on the prevention of coronary heart disease.
Wives of coronary high-risk men--are they also at higher risk? The Tromso Heart Study.  Blood lipids, blood pressure, body mass index (BMI), smoking, dietary and exercise habits were studied in 911 wives of men with high risk for coronary heart disease (CHD).  Following the 1979/80 Tromso Survey, 1373 men, aged 30-54 years, were identified as having high risk for CHD (HDL-cholesterol/total cholesterol less than or equal to 17.6% and/or total cholesterol greater than or equal to 7.86 mmol l-1).  Of the 1373 men, 911 individuals had wives who also attended the screening.  These wives were compared to age-matched, married women in the general population.  A significantly higher total cholesterol level (5.98 mmol l-1 vs.  5.78 mmol l-1), lower HDL-cholesterol/total cholesterol (30.01% vs.  31.58%), higher BMI and higher coronary risk score (4.55 vs.  3.82) was found among the wives of the high-risk men.  Furthermore, a higher proportion of these individuals were daily cigarette smokers (47.3% vs.  42.1%), and had received fewer years of education.  They also had more dietary habits associated with increased risk of CHD than other married women in the general population.  Our findings support the hypothesis that members of the same household as a person with increased risk for CHD also have increased risk.  This is most probably due to shared lifestyle.
Verapamil increases serum alkaline phosphatase in hypertensive patients.  In rats, verapamil decreases intestinal absorption of calcium, increases serum parathyroid hormone (PTH), and induces osteopenia.  In this prospective study, verapamil 80-120 mg three times daily was given for 2 months to 20 patients with hypertension, and the effects on calcium homeostasis were recorded.  This dose of verapamil significantly reduced supine systolic and diastolic blood pressure (+/- SD) from 158/100 +/- 9/8 mmHg to 146/89 +/- 14/8 mmHg (P = 0.001).  Serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) increased significantly from 2.77 +/- 1.06 mu kat l-1 to 3.19 +/- 1.22 mu kat l-1 (P = 0.004), and isoenzymes of ALP of skeletal origin appeared after verapamil treatment.  The excretion of sodium in the urine increased (Na/creatinine ratio 8.95 +/- 6.01 before and 13.16 +/- 8.26 after verapamil; P = 0.04), while the excretion of calcium, phosphate and potassium was not changed.  PTH was slightly increased at the end of verapamil treatment (1.09 +/- 0.54 vs.  0.98 +/- 0.74 microgram l-1; P = 0.07), and s-1,25(OH)2D3 was also somewhat increased (22.3 +/- 14.4 vs.  17.6 +/- 4.9 ng l-1; P = 0.26).  Serum Ca was not affected by verapamil (before verapamil 2.43 +/- 0.11 mmol l-1, after verapamil 2.40 +/- 0.12 mmol l-1; P = 0.28).  The increase in serum ALP demonstrates that verapamil affects bone cell metabolism in man.  This effect could be secondary to the enhancement of PTH secretion.
Lower extremity arterial disease in elderly subjects with systolic hypertension.  The ratio of ankle-to-arm systolic blood pressure (ankle/arm index or AAI) appears to be a non-invasive indicator of flow-significant atherosclerosis and may be a useful measure of burden of disease in a high risk population.  The prevalence of lower extremity arterial disease (LEAD) was assessed by this method in the Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program (SHEP).  Subjects were aged 60 and older with systolic blood pressure greater than 160 mmHg upon entry to the study.  An AAI of 0.90 or less was considered indicative of flow-significant LEAD.  The prevalence of LEAD by this method was 26.7% (50/187), while the prevalence of intermittent claudication (IC) was only 6.4% (12/187).  Of those with IC, 66.7% (8/12) had confirmed LEAD.  The prevalence of LEAD as measured by AAI increased with age in women and was associated with a history of current smoking and lower levels of high density lipoproteins.  In this study population with systolic hypertension, LEAD, as measured by the AAI, is more prevalent than previously described in elderly populations and is associated with other risk factors for atherosclerosis.
A prospective comparison of rubidium-82 PET and thallium-201 SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging utilizing a single dipyridamole stress in the diagnosis of coronary artery disease   The purpose of the present study is to prospectively compare myocardial perfusion imaging with rubidium-82 (82Rb) by positron emission tomography (PET) with thallium-201 (201Tl) imaging by single-photon emission tomography (SPECT) by recording both studies with a single dipyridamole handgrip stress, and reading both sets of images with the same display technique.  In a series of 202 patients with previous coronary arteriography, the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of 82Rb PET were 93%, 78%, and 90% and for 201Tl SPECT 76%, 80%, and 77%, respectively.  When 70 patients with previous therapeutic interventions were excluded, the remaining 132 patients showed a sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of 95%, 82% and 92% for 82Rb PET and 79%, 76%, and 78% for 201Tl SPECT.  The improved contrast resolution of PET resulted in markedly superior images and a more confident identification of defects.
Reducing unnecessary coronary care unit admissions: a comparison of three decision aids   OBJECTIVE: To determine whether published decision rules for ischemic heart disease have practical value in reducing unnecessary admissions to coronary care units.  DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.  SETTING: A community hospital emergency room.  PATIENTS: 235 consecutive patients presenting to an emergency room with a chief complaint of chest pain.  MEASUREMENTS: Clinical information, including observations needed to use previously published decision aids, was collected on special forms at the time of the emergency room visit.  Follow-up information was obtained from the medical records of patients who were admitted and by telephone interviews with patients who were discharged.  The authors compared the residents' actual decisions with the predictions of the decision aids regarding their ability to predict complications (that is, to identify patients who needed admission or intensive care).  MAIN RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: None of the decision aids could reduce unnecessary admissions without seriously increasing the rate of inappropriate discharges.  However, within the clinically relevant subgroup of patients for whom the decision to admit or discharge was not obvious on clinical grounds (those without complications on presentation whom the residents chose not to discharge), the decision aids examined, used in combination to verify the need for admission, might have safely averted some unnecessary admissions.
Arginine vasopressin gene expression in chronic cardiac failure in rats.  Arginine vasopressin (AVP) is known to be increased in patients and experimental animals with chronic cardiac failure (CCF).  The importance of an increase in biosynthesis of AVP in the hypothalamus has, however, not heretofore been investigated and is the purpose of the present study.  CCF secondary to infarction of myocardial tissue was induced by ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery and sham operated animals served as controls.  Four weeks later hypothalamic AVP mRNA was determined by solution hybridization using sense and anti-sense strand RNA.  The blood pressure was lower in CCF than sham animals (131.2 +/- 3.1 vs.  112.8 +/- 4.0 mm Hg, P less than 0.05) and the total heart, and right and left ventricle weights were significantly higher in CCF rats.  Plasma AVP was higher in CCF (sham 6.78 +/- 0.30; CCF 11.46 +/- 0.64 pg/ml, P less than 0.001) and plasma atrial natriuretic peptide was also higher in CCF than sham animals (205 +/- 36 vs.  554 +/- 56 pg/ml, P less than 0.001).  The AVP mRNA in hypothalamus was significantly higher in CCF than sham animals (55.5 +/- 3.7 vs.  95.9 +/- 4.0 pg/micrograms total RNA, P less than 0.001).  There was no difference in beta-actin mRNA in the hypothalamus of sham and CCF rats, indicating that the AVP-mRNA increase was specific in CCF.  These results therefore demonstrate that increased AVP biosynthesis in the hypothalamus, in addition to release of the hormone from the posterior pituitary, may occur in CCF.
Studies of myocardial protection in the immature heart. V. Safety of prolonged aortic clamping with hypocalcemic glutamate/aspartate blood cardioplegia.  This study tests the hypothesis that multidose, hypocalcemic aspartate/glutamate-enriched blood cardioplegia provides safe and effective protection during prolonged aortic clamping of immature hearts.  Of 17 puppies (6 to 8 weeks of age, 3 to 5 kg) placed on vented cardiopulmonary bypass, five were subjected to 60 minutes of 37 degrees C global ischemia without cardioplegic protection and seven underwent 120 minutes of aortic clamping with 4 degrees C multidose aspartate/glutamate-enriched blood cardioplegia ([Ca++] = 0.2 mmol/L), preceded and followed by 37 degrees C blood cardioplegic induction and reperfusion.  Five puppies underwent blood cardioplegic perfusion for 10 minutes without intervening ischemia to assess the effect of the cardioplegic solution and the delivery techniques.  Left ventricular performance was assessed 30 minutes after bypass was discontinued (Starling function curves).  Hearts were studied for high-energy phosphates and tissue amino acids.  One hour of normothermic ischemia resulted in profound functional depression, with peak stroke work index only 43% of control (0.7 +/- 0.1 versus 1.7 +/- 0.2 gm x m/kg, p less than 0.05).  There was 70% depletion of adenosine triphosphate (7.6 +/- 1 versus control 20.3 +/- 1 mumol/gm dry weight, p less than 0.05) and 75% glutamate loss (6.6 +/- 1 versus control 26.4 +/- 3 mumol/gm, p less than 0.05).  In contrast, after 2 hours of aortic clamping with multidose blood cardioplegia preceded and followed by 37 degrees C blood cardioplegia, there was complete recovery of left ventricular function (peak stroke work index 1.6 +/- 0.2 gm x m/kg) and maintenance of adenosine triphosphates, glutamate, and aspartate levels at or above control levels adenosine triphosphate 18 +/- 2 mumol/gm, aspartate 21 +/- 1 versus control 2 mumol/gm, and glutamate 25.4 +/- 2 mumol/gm).  Puppy hearts receiving blood cardioplegic perfusion without ischemia had complete recovery of control stroke work index.  We conclude that methods of myocardial protection used in adults, with amino acid-enriched, reduced-calcium blood cardioplegia, can be applied safely to the neonatal heart and allow for complete functional and metabolic recovery after prolonged aortic clamping.
Two types of abnormal genes for plasminogen in families with a predisposition for thrombosis [published erratum appears in Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991 Apr 1;88(7):2967]  The gene coding for plasminogen has been compared with several abnormal genes from Japanese patients by the polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequence analysis.  Two types of abnormal genes coding for plasminogen were identified in these patients.  In the type I mutation, a guanosine in GCT coding for Ala-601 near the active-site histidine was replaced by an adenosine resulting in ACT coding for threonine.  This mutation was also shown by the loss of a cleavage site for Fnu4HI endonuclease, a restriction enzyme that recognizes GCTGC but not ACTGC.  In the type II mutation, a guanosine in GTC coding for Val-355 was replaced by a thymidine resulting in TTC coding for phenylalanine.  This change was readily shown by digestion with Ava II endonuclease, a restriction enzyme that recognizes GGTCC and not GTTCC.  The type I mutation has been found to be identical to a plasminogen variant identified in Japanese patients by amino acid sequence analysis and also detected by isoelectric focusing, whereas the type II mutation is a unique amino acid substitution in the connecting region between the third and fourth kringles in plasminogen.  DNA sequence analysis also revealed that the abnormal genes carry several silent nucleotide substitutions located primarily within introns and 5' and 3' flanking regions.
A histopathologic study of spinal cord ischemia using an isohistogenic rat upper-half-body transplantation model.  To study the histopathologic changes of spinal cords exposed to long-duration complete ischemia, the authors developed an upper-half-body transplantation model of inbred rat.  In this model, an infant Lewis rat is transplanted to the inguinal region of another adult Lewis rat using microsurgical vascular anastomosis.  Even when 2-week-old donor rats were exposed to complete ischemia for 90 minutes, functions of the spinal cord were comparatively preserved.  In histopathologic observations, degeneration proportional to complete ischemia duration was noted.  In the 60-minute ischemia group of 2-week-old donor rats, however, no substantial differences from normal spinal cord were observed.  Under conditions of equal ischemia duration, it appeared the younger animal had the greater ischemic tolerance.
Severity of single-vessel coronary arterial stenosis and duration of angina as determinants of recruitable collateral vessels during balloon angioplasty occlusion.  To determine the factors that influence the presence of collateral vessels during coronary occlusion, we performed standardized contrast injection of the contralateral coronary artery in 58 consecutive patients, without previous myocardial infarction, undergoing percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty for 1-vessel disease (left anterior descending artery in 45, right coronary artery: in 10 and left circumflex artery in 3).  The presence of collateral vessels during coronary occlusion, defined as partial or complete epicardial opacification by collateral vessels of the vessel dilated, was related to clinical, angiographic and electrocardiographic parameters.  The angiographic appearance of collateral vessels during balloon inflation showed a weak, although statistically significant, correlation to the percent diameter stenosis before angioplasty (r = 0.28; p = 0.03) and the duration of angina (r = 0.37; p = 0.004).  By combining lesion severity with the duration of angina, collateral vessels during coronary occlusion were particularly related to a lesion severity greater than or equal to 70% and duration of angina greater than or equal to 3 months (p less than 0.001).  Furthermore, the presence of collateral vessels was associated with an absence of ST-segment shift (greater than or equal to 1 mm) during 1 minute of coronary occlusion (p less than 0.001).
Characteristics of black patients admitted to coronary care units in metropolitan Seattle: results from the Myocardial Infarction Triage and Intervention Registry (MITI).  Since 1988, 641 black and 11,892 white patients with chest pain of presumed cardiac origin have been admitted to coronary care units in 19 hospitals in metropolitan Seattle.  Black men and women were younger (58 vs 66, p less than 0.0001), more often admitted to central city hospitals (p less than 0.0001), and developed evidence of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) less often (19 vs 23%, p = 0.01).  In the subset of 2,870 AMI patients, blacks (n = 121) were younger (59 vs 67, p less than 0.0001) and had less prior coronary artery bypass graft surgery (2 vs 10%, p = 0.005) and more prior hypertension (67 vs 46%, p less than 0.0001).  During hospitalization, whites (n = 2,749) had higher rates of coronary angioplasty (18 vs 10%, p = 0.03) and coronary artery bypass graft surgery (10 vs 4%, p = 0.04), although thrombolytic therapy and cardiac catheterization were used equally in the 2 groups.  Hospital mortality was 7.4% for black and 13.1% for white patients (p = 0.07).  However, after adjustment for key demographic and clinical variables by logistic regression, this difference was not as apparent (p = 0.38).  Questions about the premature onset of coronary artery disease, excess systemic hypertension, and the differential use of interventions in black persons have been raised by other investigators.  Despite differences in age, referral patterns and the use of coronary angioplasty and bypass surgery, black and white patients with AMI in metropolitan Seattle had similar outcomes.
Late results of 200 repeat coronary artery bypass operations.  To determine the clinical outcome and the long-term results of a second coronary artery bypass operation, we studied preoperative clinical status and catheterization data in 200 consecutive patients over a 9-year period (1979 to 1987) (mean follow up time 34 months, maximum 120).  The study group included 169 men and 31 women (mean age 58.4 years [7% greater than 70 years]).  Sixty-four percent of patients had severe angina (New York Heart Association class IV), 70% had 3-vessel coronary artery disease and 21% had poor left ventricular function.  Reoperation was performed after a mean interval of 58 months after the first procedure.  A mean of 3.3 distal anastomoses was placed.  The operative mortality rate (30 days) was 7.5%, with additional cardiac morbidity (myocardial infarction, heart failure) in 11.5% of patients.  Multivariate analysis showed an increased risk in women (risk ratio 3.6) and in patients with poor left ventricular function (risk ratio 3.1).  The cumulative 5-year survival rate was estimated at 84%, with a rate of 77% for patients with poor left ventricular function (difference not significant).  The probability of remaining free of a cardiac-related event (myocardial infarction, angioplasty, third operation, cardiac death) was 64% for 5 years.  At the end of follow-up, 79% of the surviving patients were in New York Heart Association class I or II and nearly 50% of patients in the fifth year after the reoperation had good functional status.  It is concluded that a reoperation is effective but carries an increased, immediate, operative risk.
Cardiovascular risk factor clustering and ratio of total cholesterol to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol in angiographically documented coronary artery disease.  High levels of cardiac risk factors tend to cluster together and act synergistically.  To develop a suitable and practical marker for clustering, we evaluated 380 consecutive patients at the time of coronary angiography.  Analyses of lipid, rheologic, clinical and arteriographic profiles indicated a variety of interwoven relations.  Because the ratio of total cholesterol to high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol (total/HDL cholesterol) was closely related to both the presence and extent of greater than or equal to 50% diameter reduction of greater than or equal to 1 coronary arteries, it was used to divide patients into quartiles.  Clustering of high- and low-level risk factors was demonstrated in the highest and lowest quartiles of total/HDL cholesterol, respectively (p less than 0.001).  The highest quartile may be characterized by an only moderately elevated total cholesterol level but patients in this quartile may have a very low HDL cholesterol level, high triglycerides, a tendency toward high hemoglobin and fibrinogen levels, a history of smoking, previous myocardial infarction and multivessel disease.  These results suggest that total/HDL cholesterol serves as a marker not only for obstructive coronary disease but also for a cluster of potentially modifiable risk factors.
Ventricular tachycardia and accelerated ventricular rhythm presenting in the first month of life.  Fourteen infants aged less than 1 month presented to our institution during the last 22 years with ventricular tachycardia (VT) or accelerated ventricular rhythm and a structurally normal heart.  In 2, VT was associated with long QT syndrome.  Both are alive on beta-blocker therapy, 1 with an implanted pacemaker.  Twelve infants had accelerated ventricular rhythm, and 2 of these died in the first 2 months of life of unrelated conditions.  The other 10 are alive at a median age of 4 years (range 2 months to 11 years), and none were lost to follow-up.  Hemodynamic compromise did not occur with accelerated ventricular rhythm.  The ventricular rate was very close to the sinus rate in all 12, less than 12% above the sinus rate.  The mean QRS duration during accelerated ventricular rhythm was 92.5 ms, and averaged twice the QRS duration during sinus rhythm.  Fusion beats were seen in all 12, and there was atrioventricular dissociation with capture beats in 10.  In 2, ventriculoatrial conduction was present.  Treatment was attempted in 5 of the 10 survivors with accelerated ventricular rhythm, and was thought to be successful in 4.  Treatment was later successfully withdrawn in all 5, so that all 10 survivors were free of accelerated ventricular rhythm and were not receiving antiarrhythmic medications at last follow-up.  Because of the excellent long-term outcome and the lack of hemodynamic compromise during the rhythm, it seems reasonable to withhold antiarrhythmic therapy in infants with accelerated ventricular rhythm and await resolution of the rhythm.
Characterization of spontaneous termination of sustained ventricular tachycardia associated with coronary artery disease.  To characterize the change in cycle length and QRS morphology before spontaneous termination of sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT), electrocardiograms were recorded and VT cycle length measured for the periods 31 to 21 and 11 to 1 beats before termination in 55 episodes from 28 patients with coronary artery disease.  Beats 31 to 21 were designated as a period of stable arrhythmia and served as a reference for changes occurring just before termination.  Forty-four episodes of VT occurred in the setting of antiarrhythmic drug therapy; 11 episodes occurred in patients not treated with antiarrhythmic drugs.  Variability in cycle length was indexed by the standard deviation of the mean cycle length and by the percentage of consecutive cycles varying by greater than or equal to 40 ms (% greater than or equal to 40 ms).  There was greater variability just before termination (standard deviation of the mean cycle length, 25.8 ms; % greater than or equal to 40 ms, 16.7%) than during the stable period (standard deviation of the mean cycle length, 8.5 ms; % greater than or equal to 40 ms, 5.4%; p less than 0.001 for both).  This was true irrespective of antiarrhythmic drug use, although the differences in the standard deviation of the mean cycle length for beats 11 to 1 and for beats 31 to 21 were greater for the antiarrhythmic drug group (29.6 vs 8.9 ms, p less than 0.001) than for the group not receiving antiarrhythmic drugs (11.0 vs 6.7 ms, difference not significant).  No specific patterns of cycle length variability characteristic of VT termination were found.
Comparison of lisinopril versus atenolol for mild to moderate essential hypertension.  The antihypertensive effects and safety profiles of lisinopril (10 to 40 mg) and atenolol (50 to 100 mg) were compared in a randomized, double-blind, parallel group trial in 144 patients with essential hypertension.  After 8 weeks of therapy, seated blood pressure (BP) decreased by 26/15 mm Hg with lisinopril and by 19/14 mm Hg with atenolol.  Lisinopril produced a greater reduction (p less than 0.05) in sitting systolic BP than did atenolol.  Standing BP decreased by 25/15 mm Hg with lisinopril and by 19/14 mm Hg with atenolol.  No important changes in hematologic and biochemical profiles were seen with either drug.  Eleven patients, 7 receiving lisinopril and 4 receiving atenolol, were withdrawn because of adverse experiences; another 3 patients defaulted during treatment, 1 in the lisinopril group and 2 in the atenolol group.  Both drugs were well-tolerated and are therefore suitable for first-line therapy in essential hypertension.
Hemodynamic effects of renin inhibition by enalkiren in chronic congestive heart failure.  Previous efforts to block the renin-angiotensin system in patients with chronic congestive heart failure (CHF) have focused on 2 distal sites in the system, the angiotensin-converting enzyme and the angiotensin II receptor.  Recent work, however, has led to the development of agents that directly inhibit renin, the proximal step in the cascade.  In this study, we investigated the hemodynamic effects of renin inhibition in 9 patients with chronic CHF by using enalkiren, a primate-selective, dipeptide renin inhibitor, which has been previously shown to suppress plasma renin activity and to lower blood pressure in hypertensive patients.  The acute intravenous administration of enalkiren (1.0 mg/kg) produced increases in cardiac index (2.0 +/- 0.3 to 2.3 +/- 0.1 liter/min/m2) and stroke volume index (26 +/- 3 to 34 +/- 4 ml/m2) and decreases in left ventricular filling pressure (31 +/- 3 to 25 +/- 3 mm Hg), mean right atrial pressure (15 +/- 1 to 13 +/- 2 mm Hg), heart rate (78 +/- 5 to 72 +/- 6 beats/min) and systemic vascular resistance (2,199 +/- 594 to 1,339 +/- 230 dynes.s.cm-5) (all p less than 0.01 to 0.05).  These observations indicate that renin inhibition produces hemodynamic benefits in patients with chronic CHF and could potentially provide a novel approach to interfering with the renin-angiotensin system in patients with this disorder.
Effects of bucindolol on neurohormonal activation in congestive heart failure.  To examine the effects of beta-adrenergic blockade on neurohormonal activation in patients with congestive heart failure, 15 men had assessments of hemodynamics and supine peripheral renin and norepinephrine levels before and after 3 months of oral therapy with bucindolol, a nonselective beta antagonist.  At baseline, plasma renin activity did not correlate with any hemodynamic parameter.  However, norepinephrine levels had a weak correlation with left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (r = 0.74, p less than 0.01), stroke volume index (r = 0.61, p less than 0.02) and pulmonary vascular resistance (r = 0.54, p less than 0.05).  Plasma renin decreased with bucindolol therapy, from 11.6 +/- 13.4 to 4.3 +/- 4.1 ng/ml/hour (mean +/- standard deviation; p less than 0.05), whereas plasma norepinephrine was unchanged, from 403 +/- 231 to 408 +/- 217 pg/ml.  A wide diversity of the norepinephrine response to bucindolol was observed with reduction of levels in some patients and elevation in others.  Although plasma norepinephrine did not decrease, heart rate tended to decrease (from 82 +/- 20 vs 73 +/- 11 min-1, p = 0.059) with beta-adrenergic blockade, suggesting neurohormonal antagonism at the receptor level.  No changes in I-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine uptake occurred after bucindolol therapy, suggesting unchanged adrenergic uptake of norepinephrine with beta-blocker therapy.  Despite reductions in plasma renin activity and the presence of beta blockade, the response of renin or norepinephrine levels to long-term bucindolol therapy did not predict which patients had improved in hemodynamic status (chi-square = 0.37 for renin, 0.82 for norepinephrine).
Outcomes of direct coronary angioplasty for acute myocardial infarction in candidates and non-candidates for thrombolytic therapy.  Coronary angioplasty without prior thrombolytic therapy was performed in 383 patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI).  Patients were divided into 2 groups depending on whether they were candidates or non-candidates for thrombolytic therapy.  Patients were not considered thrombolytic candidates if they: (1) presented in cardiogenic shock, (2) were greater than or equal to 75 years of age, (3) had had coronary artery bypass surgery or, (4) had a reperfusion time of greater than 6 hours.  Thrombolytic and nonthrombolytic candidates had similar rates of reperfusion (92 vs 88%), nonfatal reinfarction (6.0 vs 5.9%) and recurrent myocardial ischemia (1.8 vs 0%).  Thrombolytic candidates had a lower mortality rate (3.9 vs 24%, p less than 0.0001) and a lower incidence of bleeding (4.6 vs 10.9%, p less than 0.05).  Improvement in left ventricular ejection fraction at follow-up angiography was 4.4% in thrombolytic and 10.5% in nonthrombolytic candidates (p less than 0.002).  Ejection fraction improved most in patients with anterior wall AMI (7.7% in thrombolytic candidates, 15.1% in nonthrombolytic candidates) and in patients with reperfusion times greater than 6 hours (14.2%).  These outcomes suggest that direct coronary angioplasty is a viable alternative method of reperfusion in patients with AMI who are candidates for thrombolytic therapy.  Nonthrombolytic candidates are a high-risk group of patients.  Direct coronary angioplasty may be beneficial in certain subgroups, especially for patients in cardiogenic shock and for patients presenting greater than 6 hours after the onset of chest pain with evidence of ongoing ischemia.
Effect of a calcium-entry blocker, nicardipine, on intrarenal hemodynamics in essential hypertension.  The effects of a calcium-entry blocker, nicardipine, on intrarenal hemodynamics were studied in essential hypertension.  A 4-week study was performed in eight patients with essential hypertension who were given a regular sodium diet in the first and third weeks, and a sodium-restricted diet in the second and fourth weeks.  Nicardipine, 60 mg/d, was administered in the third and fourth weeks.  The urinary sodium excretion rate (UNaV) was plotted on the y-axis against the mean arterial pressure (MAP) on the x-axis before and after the administration of nicardipine.  Assuming the difference between MAP and the x-intercept of this renal function curve represents the effective filtration pressure across the glomerular capillaries, the intrarenal hemodynamics such as afferent arteriolar resistance (RA) and efferent arteriolar resistances (RE), glomerular pressure (PG), and gross filtration coefficient (KFG) were calculated.  Although the MAP on regular salt diet was lowered from 125 +/- 3 to 109 +/- 2 mm Hg by nicardipine, neither the renal blood flow rate (RBF) (670 +/- 40 mL/min) nor the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (79 +/- 2 mL/min) was altered.  The RA was estimated to be reduced from 9,300 +/- 900 to 7,400 +/- 700 dyne.s.cm-5 (P less than 0.01), while no changes were noted in RE (4,900 +/- 400 dyne.s.cm-5), PG (50 +/- 1 mm Hg), or KFG (0.180 +/- 0.041 [mL/s]/mm Hg).  Essential hypertension has been characterized by a prominent increase in RA, resulting in maintenance of normal PG.  This Ca-entry blocker worked to normalize intrarenal hemodynamics in essential hypertension by dilating afferent arterioles alone.
Twelve-year incidence of coronary heart disease in middle-aged adults during the era of hypertensive therapy: the Framingham offspring study [published erratum appears in Am J Med 1991 Apr;90(4):537]  PURPOSE: To provide information on the incidence of coronary heart disease (CHD) in the offspring of the original cohort from the Framingham Heart Study.  PATIENTS AND METHODS: From 1972 to 1974, offspring of the original participants in the Framingham Heart Study underwent a baseline examination for standard cardiovascular risk factors.  At entry into the study, these offspring were 30 to 59 years old and free of CHD.  They were followed for 12 years, during which time 156 of 1,663 men and 55 of 1,714 women developed CHD.  RESULTS: In a multivariate proportional hazards model, CHD was significantly associated with age, lower high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) levels, and number of cigarettes smoked.  Fasting glucose levels and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) were highly associated with CHD in men, but borderline in women, while triglycerides and very-low-density lipoprotein cholesterol were not significantly associated with CHD after adjustment for HDL-C and glucose.  Blood pressure medication was used in half of the hypertensive individuals, and systolic pressure was associated with CHD in women only.  CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the importance of the common CHD risk factors of cigarette smoking and LDL-C, and extends the prognostic role of HDL-C in a middle-aged cohort.  The impact of blood pressure, with or without use of hypertensive medications, was reduced in this study, and the data suggest that this attenuation was due to successful treatment.
Furosemide-131I-hippuran renography after angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition for the diagnosis of renovascular hypertension.  PURPOSE: We have previously demonstrated the greater sensitivity of 131I-hippuran renography than 99mTC-DTPA scintigraphy to diagnose renovascular hypertension (RVH).  This study assesses the predictive diagnostic value of furosemide-131I-hippuran renography after angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibition in patients with and without RVH.  PATIENTS AND METHODS: All patients were investigated at the University of Miami/Jackson Memorial Medical Center.  Twenty-eight patients had RVH and 22 did not.  Twenty-eight patients had normal or minimally decreased renal function (serum creatinine level 1.5 mg/dL or less) and 22 had renal insufficiency (serum creatinine level 1.8 mg/dL or more).  Renography was performed 60 minutes after oral administration of 50 mg captopril or 10 minutes after intravenous injection of 40 micrograms/kg enalaprilat.  Forty milligrams of furosemide were administered intravenously 2 minutes after injection of 131I-hippuran.  The residual cortical activity (RCA) of 131I-hippuran was measured at 20 minutes.  RESULTS: RVH was unlikely when RCA after ACE inhibition was less than 30% of peak cortical activity.  Conversely, RVH was present when 131I-hippuran cortical activity steadily increased throughout the test to reach 100% at 20 minutes.  In azotemic patients with RCA between 31% and 100%, RVH was differentiated from intrinsic renal disease by obtaining a baseline renogram without ACE inhibition and comparing RCA in that study and RCA after ACE inhibition.  If RCA increased (indicating worsening renal function) after ACE inhibition, RVH was likely; whereas, intrinsic renal disease was more likely if RCA remained unchanged or decreased (indicating improved renal function) with ACE inhibition.  The test had a specificity of 95% and a sensitivity of 96% in this population.  There was a direct correlation between the results of angioplasty or surgery on high blood pressure and the changes in RCA before and after intervention (n = 20).  CONCLUSION: Furosemide-131I-hippuran renography with ACE inhibition is highly predictive in identifying patients with RVH.
Infusion of a stable prostacyclin analogue, iloprost, to patients with peripheral vascular disease: lack of antiplatelet effect but risk of thromboembolism.  PURPOSE: Prostacyclin, a potent inhibitor of platelet function and vasodilator, has been used to treat peripheral vascular disease.  The aim of this study was to monitor the thrombotic status of patients treated by infusion of a stable prostacyclin analogue, iloprost.  PATIENTS AND METHODS: Thirteen patients with peripheral vascular disease underwent iloprost infusion for 3 days (8 hours each day) in a dose ranging from 0.5 to 2 ng/kg/minute.  Variable parameters of thrombosis such as platelet reactivity (shear-induced hemostatic plug formation and thrombus formation on a collagen fiber), coagulation, and spontaneous thrombolysis (dislodgment of hemostatic plugs) were measured from non-anticoagulated blood samples by hemostatometry immediately before and 1 hour after the infusion and on the last day, 4 hours after initiation of the infusion.  RESULTS: Analysis of data from all patients 1 hour after the infusion showed no changes in platelet reactivity and spontaneous thrombolysis, but coagulation was significantly enhanced.  In four patients, significant platelet hyperreactivity was observed after the infusion.  Four of the five patients tested while undergoing iloprost infusion showed an enhanced thrombotic reaction and markedly enhanced coagulation.  Iloprost employed in vitro in a concentration that corresponds to the therapeutic peak blood level caused no inhibition of platelet function but significantly enhanced coagulation.  The threshold in vitro iloprost concentration at which anti-platelet effect and increased spontaneous thrombolysis were observed was twice that of the therapeutic blood level.  CONCLUSIONS: These findings challenge the view that antagonism of platelet function is an important factor of iloprost therapy.  Furthermore, platelet hyperreactivity in some patients and markedly enhanced coagulation during and after infusion of iloprost in general, represent a risk of thromboembolism, especially as patients are already in a prethrombotic condition.
Protamine-heparin-induced pulmonary hypertension in pigs: effects of treatment with a thromboxane receptor antagonist on hemodynamics and coagulation.  Adverse hemodynamic reactions after protamine neutralization of heparin are an infrequent but important clinical problem.  Pre-treatment of swine with a thromboxane A2 receptor antagonist has been reported to prevent the pulmonary hypertensive response occasionally seen after protamine reversal of heparin anticoagulation.  In the current study, a control group of pigs (n = 9) received intravenous heparin (300 IU/kg), followed after 10 min by a neutralizing dose of protamine (3 mg/kg).  A treatment group of pigs (n = 11) was treated identically, except that the thromboxane A2 receptor antagonist L-670596 (2 mg/kg) was infused intravenously 2 min after the protamine infusion.  Hemodynamic and coagulation profiles were monitored during these procedures.  Pulmonary hypertension developed and reached a peak within 2 min of protamine administration, often at the same time that L-670596 was administered in the treatment group.  There was no statistical difference between control and treatment groups' peak pulmonary arterial pressure and peak pulmonary vascular resistance.  However, the interval for return of mean pulmonary artery pressure from peak to baseline values was 11.6 +/- 3.1 versus 5.5 +/- 1.9 min (mean +/- SD) for control and treatment groups, respectively (P less than 0.01).  Thromboxane B2 plasma concentrations increased in both groups and were correlated with the pulmonary hypertensive response (r = 0.86, P less than 0.01).  Platelet aggregation to collagen was inhibited by the thromboxane A2 receptor antagonist (P less than 0.05).  Bleeding time was prolonged beyond normal range in 50% of L-670596-treated pigs.  All other coagulation tests in both groups returned to baseline after reversal of heparin with protamine and were unaffected by L-670596.
Coronary and left ventricular hemodynamic responses following reversal of flunitrazepam-induced sedation with flumazenil in patients with coronary artery disease.  The effects of reversal of flunitrazepam-induced sedation with flumazenil on coronary hemodynamics, myocardial oxygen consumption (MVO2), and left ventricular (LV) performance were investigated, in a double-blind trial, in 12 patients with stable coronary artery disease undergoing cardiac catheterization.  Coronary sinus blood flow was measured by continuous thermodilution.  Arterial and coronary sinus blood were analyzed for oxygen and lactate contents.  The determinants of LV performance were obtained from the cardiac output measured by thermodilution and from left heart catheterization data.  To reverse flunitrazepam-induced sedation, patients were randomly allocated to receive placebo or flumazenil (by increment, up to 1 mg) at the end of procedure.  In the placebo group, no significant hemodynamic changes were observed.  In the flumazenil group, heart rate, cardiac index, maximum velocity of shortening, and relaxation time constant were not significantly altered.  By contrast, mean aortic pressure and LV end-diastolic pressure (baselines: 90 +/- 5 and 7.3 +/- 4.1 mmHg, respectively) increased (9%, P less than 0.05 and 67%, P less than 0.05, respectively) after flumazenil administration, but these changes represented mainly a return toward presedation values.  MVO2 and coronary resistance were not significantly altered, whereas CSBF increased slightly (baseline: 119 +/- 20 ml/min; increase 10%, P less than 0.05).  No electrocardiographic evidence of myocardial ischemia was observed during the study.  These data show that reversal of benzodiazepine effects with flumazenil is not associated with a major alteration of LV systolic function, relaxation, or coronary hemodynamics in patients with coronary artery disease.  Nevertheless, it should be cautiously used when LV end-diastolic pressure is increased at the time of its administration.
Morphometry of the subepithelial circulation in sheep airways. Effect of vascular congestion.  In order to quantitate the subepithelial microvascular volume and its relation to the airway lumen, we conducted a morphometric analysis of the vascular compartment in the wall of the trachea (within a 55-microns depth from the epithelial basement membrane) and of 1.0 and 0.5-mm bronchioles of sheep.  The lungs were fixed by bronchial and pulmonary artery perfusion with glutaraldehyde under three experimental conditions: (1) bronchial artery pressure, 100 mm Hg pulmonary artery pressure, 20 mm Hg (control); (2) bronchial artery pressure, 100 mm Hg, pulmonary artery pressure, 40 mm Hg (pulmonary hypertension, PH); (3) bronchial artery pressure, 100 mm Hg, pulmonary artery pressure, 40 mm Hg (pharmacologic vasodilation with sodium nitroprusside, PH + V).  Venous pressures were atmospheric.  Under control conditions, the microvascular volume fraction comprised 12, 16, and 15% of the subepithelial tissue in the trachea and 1-mm and 0.5-mm bronchioles, respectively.  PH increased the microvascular volume fraction in the bronchioles (p less than 0.05), but it had no effect on the microvasculature in the trachea.  PH + V approximately doubled the microvascular volume fraction in the trachea and the bronchioles.  PH increased the mean wall thickness, and PH and PH + V decreased the airway cross-sectional area in the 1-mm bronchioles.  These observations demonstrate that the microvasculature constitutes a considerable volume fraction of the subepithelial airway tissue and that vascular congestion can narrow the bronchiolar lumen.
Estimating left ventricular filling pressure during positive end-expiratory pressure in humans.  In the critically ill, accurate measurements of left ventricular (LV) filling pressure using pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (Ppao) are important for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes.  In patients receiving positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), Ppao may not reflect LV filling pressure because of elevated pericardial pressure (Ppc).  It has been proposed that in humans, Ppc and right atrial pressure (PRA) are equal, so that referencing Ppao to PRA may improve the assessment of LV filling pressure when Ppc is elevated.  Similarly, it has also been shown in the dog that nadir Ppao immediately after airway disconnection from PEEP (nadir Ppao), accurately reflects LV filling pressure when LV filling pressure is greater than or equal to 10 mm Hg.  We examined methods of estimating LV filling pressure using Ppao measurements under conditions in which increases in Ppc were the primary determinants of differences in the two measurements.  Using left atrial pressure (PLA) relative to Ppc, called transmural PLA (PLAtm), as LV filling pressure, we compared the accuracy of Ppao, nadir Ppao, and Ppao relative to PRA to reflect PLAtm in 15 postoperative cardiac surgery patients in whom an air-filled pericardial balloon catheter and a left atrial catheter were inserted during surgery.  PEEP was sequentially increased from zero to 15 cm H2O.  We found that PRA always exceeded Ppc (p less than 0.01) and increased less with PEEP than did Ppc (p less than 0.05).  At less than or equal to 5 cm H2O PEEP, both Ppao and nadir Ppao were similar to each other and to PLAtm.
Fibrin- and fibrinogen-related antigens in patients with venous disease and venous ulceration.  Abnormalities in systemic fibrinolysis have been implicated in the pathogenesis of venous ulceration.  Patients with venous disease have a prolonged euglobulin lysis time and elevated plasma fibrinogen levels, yet little is known about the metabolism of fibrinogen and fibrin in such patients.  In this study, we have used a technique that involves electrophoresis and densitometric analysis of captured fibrin-related antigens to measure the concentration and proportions of the individual fibrin and fibrinogen degradation products in patients with venous disease of the lower extremity.  As a group, patients with venous disease had markedly elevated levels of total fibrin-related antigen and D-dimer, the terminal degradation product of cross-linked fibrin.  Levels of D-monomer, the breakdown product of fibrinogen and non-cross-linked fibrin monomer, and a measure of fibrinogenolysis were normal in all patients.  In patients with ulcers, the levels of D-dimer were disproportionately higher than expected from fibrin monomer levels.  On an individual basis, significant elevations of D-dimer were present in six (55%) of the 11 patients with venous disease with ulcers and in three (43%) of the seven patients with venous disease without ulcers.  We conclude that patients with venous disease have uniform evidence for enhanced fibrin formation, as evidenced by elevated levels of total fibrin-related antigen and D-dimer.  This is regardless of whether the venous disease is accompanied by ulceration.
Deterioration following delay in performing femoral angioplasty.  It is not uncommon for a delay to occur between assessment arteriography and angioplasty attempt.  We reviewed retrospectively the arteriograms of 61 patients where such a delay occurred to assess progression of superficial femoral artery (SFA) disease in this interval.  A mean delay of 14.6 days (range 2-60 days) occurred between arteriogram and angioplasty attempt.  Arteriographic deterioration was found in six of 61 patients (9.8%) and in three this precluded angioplasty.  Of the six patients four had initial arteriography via the same side as the SFA disease whilst two had arteriography via the contralateral femoral approach.  We discuss the aetiology of this phenomenon and suggestions are made to reduce its incidence.
Hemodynamic profiles of prostaglandin E1, isoproterenol, prostacyclin, and nifedipine in experimental porcine pulmonary hypertension.  BACKGROUND AND METHODS: We compared the hemodynamic effects of four vasodilators in experimental embolic pulmonary hypertension in a randomized controlled trial, using nine pigs weighing 16 to 23 kg.  After anesthesia induction and cannulation with arterial, central venous, and thermodilution output pulmonary artery catheters, animals were repetitively embolized with glass beads (60 to 160 mu) in order to establish pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary artery pressure [PAP] doubled from baseline).  Prostaglandin E1 (PGE1), isoproterenol, prostacyclin (PGI2), and nifedipine were compared at doses producing equivalent reduction in systemic BP.  RESULTS: Only PGE1 and PGI2 decreased both PAP and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR).  PGE1 decreased PAP from 39 +/- 1 to 33 +/- 1 mm Hg; prostacyclin decreased PAP from 38 +/- 1 to 31 +/- 1 mm Hg and produced the largest increase in cardiac output (Qt).  Isoproterenol did not change PAP, markedly increased heart rate (162 +/- 8 to 216 +/- 11 beats/min), and resulted in significant arrhythmias.  Nifedipine increased PVR from 1044 +/- 113 to 1125 +/- 100 dyne.sec.cm-5 and decreased Qt.  CONCLUSIONS: Vasodilators demonstrate unique hemodynamic drug profiles.  Isoproterenol infusion is characterized by tachycardia and arrhythmias.  Both PGE1 and PGI2 effectively decrease PAP and PVR.  Nifedipine depressed Qt significantly in this glass-bead embolization model of acute pulmonary hypertension.
Effects of milrinone on pulmonary vasculature in normal dogs and in dogs with pulmonary hypertension.  OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of milrinone on pulmonary vasculature.  BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that bipyridines or their derivatives may have a selective pulmonary vasodilation effect.  METHODS: Preliminary study: milrinone administration to 12 normal dogs (low dose [bolus 75 micrograms/kg for 5 min followed by a continuous infusion at 0.75 micrograms/kg.min, n = 6]; high dose [bolus 150 micrograms/kg for 5 min followed by continuous infusion at 1.5 micrograms/kg.min, n = 6]).  Main study: milrinone administration to 18 dogs with pulmonary hypertension due to pulmonary embolism induced by a massive injection of autologous muscle cubes.  The pulmonary hypertension dogs were divided into three groups: a) group E (n = 6) received embolization only, as control; b) group L (n = 6) received low-dose milrinone; and c) group H (n = 6) received high-dose milrinone, equivalent to the preliminary study group.  Hemodynamic measurements and blood samplings were obtained at baseline and at 15, 30, and 60 min after start of milrinone infusion.  RESULTS: Milrinone did not change mean pulmonary artery pressure (MPAP) in normal dogs.  Milrinone decreased MPAP significantly in dogs with pulmonary hypertension.  Pulmonary vascular resistance index remained at an almost constant level in normal dogs, but decreased significantly in dogs with pulmonary hypertension.  Mean arterial pressure was maintained at a constant level in all groups.  High-dose milrinone administration decreased systemic vascular resistance index (SVRI) significantly; low-dose milrinone administration decreased SVRI slightly.  CONCLUSIONS: Milrinone may have a selective pulmonary vasodilatory effect only in dogs with pulmonary hypertension.  The mechanism that produced a selectivity on pulmonary vasculature in dogs with pulmonary hypertension is unknown.  However, an inhibition of platelet aggregation may decrease the MPAP resulting from an increase in cAMP caused by milrinone.  Further studies are needed to resolve the pulmonary vasodilatory effect of milrinone in dogs with pulmonary hypertension.
A prospective study of sodium-lithium countertransport and hypertension in Utah.  A 7-year prospective study of a cohort of 1,458 normotensive adults from Utah pedigrees, screened from 1980 to 1985, was done to determine whether baseline levels of sodium-lithium countertransport were associated with an increased risk of future hypertension.  Subsequent new hypertension (n = 39) was ascertained in 1989 from detailed follow-up medical questionnaires (67% response).  Previous segregation analyses on a subset of these pedigree members who responded (n = 342) using family relationships in addition to countertransport levels have shown statistically inferred major gene segregation of sodium-lithium countertransport levels.  In the normotensive adults inferred by segregation analysis to carry the recessive major gene for high sodium-lithium countertransport, new-onset hypertension occurred in 18.8% (3 of 16) compared with 3.7% (12 of 326) in the low sodium-lithium countertransport genotype group (relative risk, 4.6 [1.6, 13.9]; p = 0.03).  However, an elevated baseline sodium-lithium countertransport level without genotype information from segregation analysis did not increase the risk of future hypertension in the complete cohort of adult pedigree members (relative risk, 1.02 [0.85, 1.22]).  Adjustment for other risk factors reduced the relative risk to 0.90 (0.72, 1.11).  We conclude that the presence of a major gene for sodium-lithium countertransport or another closely linked gene, rather than the actual level of sodium-lithium countertransport, may increase the risk of hypertension onset.  High sodium-lithium countertransport levels do not increase the risk of future hypertension for individuals in whom only polygenic and environmental effects determine sodium-lithium countertransport level.
High-normal blood pressure progression to hypertension in the Framingham Heart Study.  This study sought to determine if individuals with high-normal blood pressure (diastolic blood pressure of 85-89 mm Hg) progress to hypertension more frequently than those with normal blood pressure (diastolic blood pressure less than 85 mm Hg), thus advancing to a higher cardiovascular risk category.  Individuals from the Framingham Heart Study were placed in normal and high-normal blood pressure categories and followed for 26 years for the development of hypertension.  With hypertension defined as a diastolic blood pressure of 95 mm Hg or greater or the initiation of antihypertensive therapy, 23.6% of men and 36.2% of women with normal blood pressure developed hypertension compared with 54.2% of men and 60.6% of women with high-normal blood pressure.  The relative risk for the development of hypertension associated with high-normal blood pressure was 2.25 for men (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.8-2.8; p less than 0.0001) and 1.89 for women (95% CI, 1.5-2.3; p less than 0.0001).  The age-adjusted relative risks estimated by the proportional hazards model were 3.36 for men and 3.37 for women (p less than 0.001).  Among those risk factors examined, baseline systolic and diastolic blood pressure, Metropolitan relative weight, and change in weight over time were significant predictors of future hypertension in men and women whose initial blood pressure was normal.  For men with high-normal blood pressure, systolic blood pressure and change in weight were identified as risk factors for future hypertension.  These results indicate that the probability of individuals with blood pressure in the high-normal range developing hypertension is twofold to threefold higher than in those with normal blood pressure.
Renal manifestations of NaCl sensitivity in borderline hypertensive rats.  Compared with the normotensive Wistar-Kyoto rat, the spontaneously hypertensive rat exhibits exaggerated alterations in renal sympathetic nerve activity and excretory function during volume expansion (exaggerated natriuresis) and environmental stress (antinatriuresis).  The borderline hypertensive rat is the first filial offspring of the spontaneously hypertensive rat and the Wistar-Kyoto rat and develops hypertension with increased dietary NaCl intake.  The present investigation sought to determine whether the dietary NaCl intake-induced transition from the normotensive state of the Wistar-Kyoto parent to the hypertensive state of the spontaneously hypertensive parent in the borderline hypertensive rat was accompanied by a similar transition of the renal sympathetic nerve activity and excretory responses to volume expansion and environmental stress.  Borderline hypertensive rats fed a 1% NaCl diet remained normotensive and exhibited renal sympathetic nerve activity and excretory responses to volume expansion and environmental stress that were similar to those of their Wistar-Kyoto parent.  Borderline hypertensive rats fed an 8% NaCl diet developed hypertension and exhibited responses that were similar to those of their spontaneously hypertensive parent.  Thus, the dietary NaCl intake-induced transition from the normotensive state of the Wistar-Kyoto parent to the hypertensive state of the spontaneously hypertensive parent in the borderline hypertensive rat was accompanied by a similar transition of the renal sympathetic nerve activity and excretory responses to volume expansion and environmental stress.  The results suggest that increased dietary NaCl intake is able to induce or unmask the capabilities for these responses, which are genetically conveyed to the borderline hypertensive rat by the spontaneously hypertensive rat parent in latent forms.
Exclusion of the Na(+)-H+ antiporter as a candidate gene in human essential hypertension.  The primary abnormalities that contribute to the pathogenesis of human essential hypertension are unknown.  The known genetic contribution to this disorder suggests the possible use of genetic linkage analysis to test whether specific candidate genes contribute to the pathogenesis of either essential hypertension or intermediate phenotypes.  Among such phenotypes, elevated erythrocyte Na(+)-Li+ countertransport (SLC) is the best known, supporting major gene inheritance by pedigree analysis.  Striking similarities between SLC and Na(+)-H+ exchange suggest that mutations at the Na(+)-H+ antiporter gene locus (APNH) might result in elevated SLC and contribute to the subsequent pathogenesis of hypertension.  We have tested these hypotheses by genetic linkage analysis, with APNH as a candidate gene.  By determining genotypes at APNH and flanking loci in pedigrees that support major gene segregation of elevated SLC, we have excluded linkage of APNH and the major SLC locus with a LOD score of -5.91, an odds ratio of almost 1,000,000:1 against linkage.  In the analysis of 93 hypertensive sibling pairs, we have further demonstrated that APNH explains none of the variance in SLC in hypertensive individuals (r2 = 6 x 10(-7), p greater than 0.99).  Finally, we have directly tested for linkage of APNH to genes predisposing toward hypertension by linkage in hypertensive sibling pairs.  Mean allele sharing at APNH is not greater than expected from random assortment in hypertensive siblings (0.92 versus 1.0, p greater than 0.80), and the upper 95% confidence limit of this value (1.04) indicates that mutations at APNH rarely if ever contribute to the pathogenesis of hypertension in this population.
Methodology of sodium sensitivity assessment. The example of age and sex.  This article addresses the methodology of sodium sensitivity assessment.  There have been reports to suggest that a high sodium intake is a cause of elevated blood pressure and trials to indicate that a reduction in sodium intake may reduce blood pressure that is already high; the implications of these findings are discussed.  Many studies on sodium sensitivity suffer from what could be called the "normal probability fallacy"; without appropriate control conditions, an intervention such as sodium restriction may incorrectly be assigned to a more pronounced response in a subgroup of the study population.  As an example, findings are reviewed of age and sex as determinants of a response of blood pressure to variations in sodium intake.  The limited data available suggest that subjects that are older and have higher blood pressure levels seem to benefit more from a reduction in sodium intake.  In addition, elderly subjects at a high dietary sodium intake may have a higher risk of developing hypertension.  Findings in both nonexperimental and experimental studies tend to support this view.  Findings on sex differences are less consistent.  A systematic approach to the assessment of factors and mechanisms responsible for sodium sensitivity in some subjects is needed to determine who might benefit most.  Until more data are available, there is little basis to discriminate sodium-sensitive from sodium-resistant hypertensive subjects.
Racial and ethnic modifiers of the salt-blood pressure response.  The relation between sodium and blood pressure is a centuries-old question.  A substantial body of epidemiological and experimental data has accumulated that strongly implicates NaCl as having a causal role in the genesis of arterial hypertension.  Prospective studies that have been performed in diverse populations that have manipulated NaCl exposure by diet or infusion have repeatedly documented an NaCl pressor effect.  Further, similar studies in biracial populations have also demonstrated a greater prevalence of "salt sensitivity" in blacks compared with whites.  The reasons for this observation are not entirely clear; however, intrinsic or hypertension-induced renal abnormalities that limit natriuretic capacity, reduced Na+,K(+)-ATPase pump activity, other membrane ion transport disturbances, differential exposure to psychological stressors, greater insulin resistance, and dietary factors (reduced Ca+ and K+ intake) have all been suggested as possibly playing a role.  Salt sensitivity appears to be a widespread phenomenon.  However, it is critically important to determine what factors account for racial differences in salt sensitivity.  Moreover, the prevalence of salt sensitivity in the general population is unknown.  Current definitions of salt sensitivity are varied and unidirectional.  In comparison with bidirectional criteria (blood pressure increase with salt loading and blood pressure decrease with salt restriction), they are probably inadequate to identify salt-sensitive individuals who manifest less extreme blood pressure change after dietary sodium or plasma volume manipulations.  More sensitive criteria for diagnosing salt sensitivity will facilitate a better understanding of racial and ethnic differences in the prevalence of salt sensitivity.
Biohistory of slavery and blood pressure differences in blacks today. A hypothesis.  Genetic factors are known to play an important role in the variations in blood pressure levels.  However, genetic factors that explain the higher average blood pressure levels of western hemisphere blacks when compared with African blacks have not been seriously considered.  Because the genetic makeup of a population is largely determined by biological and ecological forces in the past, an examination of the biohistory of blacks, specifically the slavery era, was conducted.  An overview of the salient findings of that investigation is included in this article.  The published historical evidence on the transatlantic slave trade and New World slavery (from the 16th century to the 19th century) reveals that conditions existed for "natural selection," and therefore, genetic changes were virtually inevitable in the slave populations.  During this period of history, mortality was extremely high, and fertility (or reproductive success) was so low among the survivors that most plantation societies in the western hemisphere depended on a constant importation of captives (over 12 million) from Africa for the viability of the plantation communities.  Because the major causes of death were salt-depletive diseases such as diarrhea, fevers, and vomiting, it is argued that individuals with an enhanced genetic-based ability to conserve salt had a distinct survival advantage over others and were, therefore, more likely to bequeath their genotype to subsequent generations of Western hemisphere blacks.  Thus, it is predicted that blacks in the Americas have a greater frequency of individuals with an enhanced genetic-based ability to conserve salt than African blacks.
Sodium-potassium interaction in hypertension and hypertensive cardiovascular disease.  Epidemiological evidence suggests that low potassium intake is associated with the probability of occurrence of hypertension and stroke.  The short-term response to increased potassium intake is increased sodium excretion as well as increased potassium excretion; the short-term response to increased sodium intake is increased potassium excretion as well as increased sodium excretion.  In some experimental studies, increased amounts of potassium have been able to block the noxious influences of sodium.  Sodium and potassium must be concomitantly considered in the investigation of the association of either of these cations with hypertension and cardiovascular disease.  The chloride ion is also important for sodium's effects; its importance in potassium's effects has not been extensively explored.
A consensus approach to electrolytes and blood pressure. Could we all be right?  This commentary sets forth the hypothesis that the putative beneficial or detrimental effects of specific electrolytes on blood pressure regulation in fact reflect highly integrated responses to interactions among these cationic and anionic species.  In this paradigm, the impact of any given intake of an electrolyte on arterial pressure will be influenced by the concurrent consumption of other electrolytes.  Thus, the heterogeneous blood pressure response in humans to isolated manipulations of nutrients such as sodium, calcium, and potassium may be determined, in part, by the adequacy of the dietary intake of other mineral elements.  If this hypothesis is validated by continued research in this area, we would have new strategies available to improve blood pressure control in humans.  For example, treatment of "NaCl sensitivity" in some humans might be more effectively approached by correcting dietary deficiencies of either potassium or calcium than by restricting dietary NaCl.
Dietary sodium reduction for hypertension prevention and treatment.  Nutritional-nonpharmacological approaches for the treatment and prevention of hypertension are of great interest.  Sodium reduction is one of the primary methods recommended for these purposes.  The general public is interested in the reduction of dietary sodium intake and has responded with a decrease in table salt use, the purchase of lowered sodium food products, and the use of food labels to help guide food purchases.  Countervailing trends in the use of convenience foods and dining out increase the difficulty for individuals to lower sodium intake.  Clinical trials that have used sodium reduction alone or in combination with other lifestyle therapies have demonstrated the feasibility of reducing dietary sodium intake from 30% to 50% for up to 4 years, in a variety of populations.  Trials that used lifestyle and weight loss interventions have also achieved significant reductions in body weight and alcohol consumption and increases in physical activity.  A variety of studies indicate that long-term sodium reduction is feasible and that it is acceptable to patients.  No negative consequences of these interventions have been observed, and in some cases improvement in the intake of other nutrients has occurred.  Nonpharmacological interventions have resulted in hypertension control in significant proportions of the trial populations.  These studies demonstrate that the foregoing types of interventions can significantly contribute to hypertension treatment and prevention.
A perspective on reducing salt intake.  Epidemiological, clinical, and experimental evidence links excessive salt consumption to hypertension; there appears to be no evidence that it is beneficial.  I conclude that it should be public policy to advise and help Americans to reduce their salt intake.  Because even mild hypertension increases risk, the overall problem does not appear to be amenable to treatment, although treatment for those with clinical hypertension will always be needed.  There appears to be little likelihood that identification of those "at risk" will be successful, nor does it appear that we have the capacity at this time to conduct successful preventive field trials.  It is difficult for the individual to modify his diet alone.  The successful strategy is to modify the food supply by changing public demand.  The public responds to dietary advice if acceptable and identifiable products are available.  Because most of the salt is in commercially prepared foods and because their consumption will increase in the future, the major responsibility for lowering salt consumption will fall on the food manufacturers.  They are beginning to respond, and there appears to be ample opportunity for them to reduce the salt content of foods markedly.  Our temporary objectives, however, should be modest, because unrealistic objectives only discourage those who attempt to follow them.
An overview of randomized trials of sodium reduction and blood pressure   To test for effects on systolic and diastolic blood pressure and to provide precise estimates of their magnitude, we conducted an overview of randomized clinical trials that aimed to reduce the intake of sodium in human subjects.  We excluded from pooled analyses trials with confounded designs, those that compared intake levels beyond the usual range in the population, and those without published reports.  Two reviewers abstracted information in duplicate and differences were reconciled.  Twenty-three trials with outcome data from an aggregate of 1,536 subjects were included.  Data were pooled both separately for hypertensive and normotensive subjects and for all trials combined.  With the use of sample size weighting, blood pressure reductions (net of controls) were 4.9 +/- 1.3/2.6 +/- 0.8 mm Hg (systolic and diastolic, respectively, with 95% confidence limits) in hypertensive subjects and 1.7 +/- 1.0/1.0 +/- 0.7 mm Hg in normotensive subjects.  The combined blood pressure reductions were 2.9 +/- 0.8/1.6 +/- 0.5 mm Hg.  These changes were associated with mean reduction of urinary sodium excretion ranging from 16 to 171 mmol/24 hr for individual trials.  A dose-response relation across trials was found, both in normotensive and in hypertensive subjects.  These results indicate that sodium reduction lowers mean blood pressure in both hypertensive and normotensive individuals for periods of at least several months.  The findings are highly consistent with results of observational epidemiological studies and have implications for preventive strategies of blood pressure control.
Neurovascular mechanisms and sodium balance in the pathogenesis of hypertension.  Physiological studies have clarified the role that the brain has in the interplay between salt balance and hypertension.  Neural mechanisms and endocrine secretions play a pivotal role in the adaptation of mammals to changes in the intake and excretion of sodium.  Maneuvers that alter the concentration of sodium in the plasma modify the sensitivity of baroreceptor reflexes and alter vascular reactivity.  These changes may be mediated in part by the release of vasopressin.  The research also suggests that the brain indirectly modulates the ability of the vascular endothelium to release vasoactive factors.  Collectively, these studies illustrate the multiple effects of the sodium ion on the peripheral neural and central endocrine mechanisms that participate in the regulation of arterial pressure.
Genetic traits related to hypertension and electrolyte metabolism.  The genetic and cultural heritability and intercorrelation of traits related to hypertension have been carried out in 98 Utah pedigrees (2,500 person) and 58 sibships with two or more hypertensive persons (131 hypertensive persons).  Although none of these traits has been established as a marker for "sodium-sensitive hypertension," many of them are related at least indirectly to both electrolyte metabolism and risk of hypertension.  Significant recessive monogenic effects and high total heritability (52-84%) were found for urinary kallikrein, high fat pattern index, intraerythrocytic sodium, Na-Li countertransport, and ouabain binding sites.  Familial correlations more strongly attributable to shared environment than to genetic effects were found for Na,K-ATPase pump activity, intraerythrocytic magnesium, plasma digoxin-like factor, plasma renin activity, and plasma sodium concentration.  All anthropometric variables tested showed highly significant genetic heritability with low and insignificant shared family environmental effects.  Several of the genetically determined cellular cation tests also correlated with other genetic traits including plasma lipids, anthropometric measurements, and other cellular cation tests.  Among hypertensive individuals with familial dyslipidemic hypertension, plasma insulin levels correlated with obesity and lipid abnormalities and with several cellular cation flux tests associated with hypertension.
Sympathetic neural contribution to salt-induced hypertension in Dahl rats.  The Dahl strain provides a model for examining mechanisms involved in the genetic sensitivity or resistance to salt-induced hypertension.  Dahl salt-sensitive rats develop hypertension when fed a high salt diet; Dahl salt-resistant rats remain normotensive.  Based on early experiments, it was thought that hypertension in Dahl salt-sensitive rats epitomized the overriding importance of renal and humoral mechanisms in salt-induced hypertension, but studies in the past 15 years have demonstrated that alterations in sympathetic neural mechanisms also participate critically in the genetic predisposition to salt-induced hypertension in Dahl salt-sensitive rats.  This article briefly reviews sympathetic neural mechanisms in Dahl rats, including evidence for a role of afferent baroreceptor as well as central neural and peripheral adrenergic mechanisms in salt-induced hypertension in Dahl salt-sensitive rats.
Relation between sodium intake, renal function, and the regulation of arterial pressure.  The long-term regulation of arterial pressure requires the maintenance of a balance between sodium and water intake and sodium and water excretion.  Normal salt and water balance leads to stable body fluid volumes and the maintenance of normal renal function is critical to establishing extracellular fluid volume homeostasis.  This review focuses on the role of the kidney in the long-term control of salt and water balance with particular emphasis on the relations between sodium intake, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, renal sympathetic nerve activity, and the regulation of arterial pressure via renal sodium and water excretion.  The accumulation of evidence in recent years demonstrates that low level elevation of renin release, circulating angiotensin II or aldosterone, or activation of renal sympathetic outflow may alter renal function such that normal natriuretic and diuretic responses to arterial pressure are significantly impeded.  Under these circumstances, the maintenance of normal sodium and water excretion requires a significant elevation of arterial pressure.  Thus, compromised renal function leads to elevation of arterial pressure to maintain adequate sodium and water balance during periods of increased sodium intake.  The resultant chronic elevation of arterial pressure then becomes a compromise that is used by the kidneys to maintain normal extracellular body fluid volumes.
Dietary salt and blood pressure. A perspective.  Although dietary salt restriction is often valuable as sole or adjunctive therapy of hypertensive disorders, it is abundantly clear that hypertensive patients comprise a heterogeneous group with regard to salt sensitivity of blood pressure.  This is apparent despite the many methodological obstacles to defining salt sensitivity in an individual patient.  Currently, dietary trial is the only sure means of defining a given patient as responsive to salt restriction.  Easily definable markers of salt sensitivity would allow appropriate targeting of this rather ponderous therapy.  Promising leads include the assessment of membrane ion transporters such as sodium-lithium exchange and of the activity of the renin-angiotensin system, including the phenomenon of "non-modulating" hypertension and other volume regulatory hormones such as atrial natriuretic factor.  Although less intensively studied than in hypertensive patients, the blood pressure response of normal subjects to salt restriction is also marked by great variability.  Given the possibility of deleterious consequences of population-wide salt restriction for at least some people in a setting such as the United States, it seems imprudent to recommend such a policy before its proven worth has been demonstrated by clinical trial.  Pending such evidence and the development of markers, salt restriction should be reserved for those in whom it is of demonstrated efficacy.
Avoiding interpretive pitfalls when assessing arrhythmia suppression after myocardial infarction: insights from the long-term observations of the placebo-treated patients in the Cardiac Arrhythmia Pilot Study (CAPS)   The Cardiac Arrhythmia Pilot Study (CAPS) was a 1 year trial that analyzed the safety and effectiveness of arrhythmia suppression in 502 patients surviving acute myocardial infarction who had greater than or equal to 10 ventricular premature depolarizations/h or greater than or equal to 5 runs of ventricular tachycardia on a Holter recording obtained 6 to 60 days after the acute infarction.  Because 100 of these patients received placebo in a double-blind fashion for 1 year, a comprehensive objective analysis was performed of spontaneous arrhythmia changes based on real data rather than statistical estimates.  In the CAPS placebo group, 19% developed some serious clinical event in 1 year (death, heart failure, proarrhythmia) that could likely be attributable to antiarrhythmic drug toxicity.  A significant reduction in the frequency of ventricular premature depolarizations (p = 0.004) occurred in the first few weeks of "therapy" with a further significant (p less than 0.04) decrease between 3 to 12 months.  After initiation of placebo antiarrhythmic therapy, 27% had "apparent ventricular premature depolarization suppression" (greater than or equal to 70% reduction) after one Holter recording evaluation and nearly half (48%) after six Holter recordings to assess suppression were performed.
Evaluation of preload reserve during isometric exercise testing in patients with old myocardial infarction: Doppler echocardiographic study.  To estimate the preload reserve in response to an increase in afterload in patients with old myocardial infarction, the relation between the Doppler echocardiographic inflow velocity pattern and left ventricular end-diastolic pressure was investigated during isometric handgrip exercise testing.  The study population consisted of 16 normal subjects and 40 patients with old myocardial infarction.  The 40 patients were subdivided into two groups according to left ventricular end-diastolic pressure at rest: group I (22 patients), less than 18 mm Hg; group II (18 patients), 18 mm Hg or more.  At rest, the ratio of peak velocity in atrial contraction phase to peak velocity in early diastolic filling phase (A/E) was significantly higher in the patients with old myocardial infarction than in normal subjects; values in the two subgroups of myocardial infarction did not differ significantly.  The A/E ratio and left ventricular end-diastolic pressure increased significantly during exercise in group I.  Conversely, the change in left ventricular end-diastolic pressure during exercise in group II was significantly greater than that in group I, and was associated with a decrease in the A/E ratio.  Thus, an atrial compensatory mechanism operated effectively in response to the increase in afterload in patients with a normal left ventricular filling pressure, whereas this compensatory mechanism deteriorated in patients with elevated left ventricular filling pressure due to a limited preload reserve.
Noninvasive assessment of intrinsic ventricular load dynamics in dilated cardiomyopathy   On the basis of hemodynamic theory, a new noninvasive method is developed to provide improved insights into the significance of depressed Doppler left ventricular ejection variables in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy.  The net force (F) associated with intraventricular flow throughout ejection can be written as: F = A.dv/dt + B.v2, where v is the ejection velocity and A and B are variables related to the geometry of the ventricle and its outflow tract.  Instantaneous levels of this force were calculated in 9 normal subjects and 10 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy using Doppler, M-mode and two-dimensional echocardiography.  The maximal ejection force (Fmax) was 47.5 +/- 8.5 kdyn in normal subjects and 25.5 +/- 6.2 kdyn in those with dilated cardiomyopathy (p = 0.0001).  Peak local acceleration and outflow velocity were severely depressed in those with cardiomyopathy compared with normal subjects (1,260 +/- 129 versus 2,671 +/- 430 cm/s2 and 71 +/- 14 versus 109 +/- 7 cm/s, respectively; p = 0.0001).  Maximal ejection force was attained very early in ejection.  A significant linear correlation was found between peak outflow acceleration and maximal ejection force (n = 19; r = 0.91, p = 0.0001).  At the time of peak ejection velocity, the net force had decreased to 64% of its peak value in those with cardiomyopathy, whereas in normal subjects, it had decreased to only 84% of its peak value (p = 0.008).  In normal subjects, the ejection force was positive during the first 75% of ejection, but in those with cardiomyopathy, it was positive only during the first 54% (p = 0.0003).  Once its peak value was attained, total left ventricular systolic wall stress declined rapidly during ejection in normal subjects (to 33% of its peak value by end-ejection), whereas it remained elevated throughout ejection in patients with cardiomyopathy (at 60% of its peak value by end-ejection, p = 0.0001 versus normal).  The maximal ejection force corresponded to a calculated intraventricular peak pressure gradient of 9.8 +/- 1.6 mm Hg in normal subjects and 6 +/- 1.2 mm Hg in those with cardiomyopathy (p = 0.0001).  The average contribution of the intrinsic component of the left ventricular systolic load (that is, wall stress associated with the ventricular to aortic pressure gradient) to the total myocardial load was 9.1% (range 7.3% to 11.2%) in normal subjects and 6.2% (range 3.9% to 7.5%) in those with cardiomyopathy (p = 0.0001).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
Immediate reproducibility of electrically induced sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia before and during antiarrhythmic therapy   The immediate reproducibility of sustained ventricular tachycardia induction was evaluated prospectively during 106 studies performed in 53 patients with clinical sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia.  Programmed electrical stimulation was performed twice, using the same protocol during 53 drug-free studies and 53 subsequent studies on antiarrhythmic therapy.  Sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia was reproduced in 104 (98%) of the 106 studies.  There was no significant difference in the incidence of reproducible tachycardia in the drug-free state compared with that observed during treatment with different classes of antiarrhythmic drugs.  An increase in the number of extrastimuli was required to reinitiate the tachycardia in 9 (11%) of 83 studies in which single or double extrastimuli were initially required to induce the tachycardia.  In 39 (37%) of 104 studies with reproducible tachycardia induction, the two tachycardias significantly differed in electrocardiographic (ECG) configuration and cycle length.  These observations suggest that the overall reproducibility of ventricular tachycardia induction is sufficiently high to provide a reliable marker for evaluating the efficacy of therapeutic interventions.  However, specific tachycardia characteristics such as cycle length and ECG configuration are more variable even within the same study and may be less useful in assessing the effects of subsequent interventions.
Differences in QRS configuration during unipolar pacing from adjacent sites: implications for the spatial resolution of pace-mapping.  To examine the spatial resolution of unipolar pace-mapping, 12 lead electrocardiograms (ECGs) recorded during pacing from each of the poles of a quadripolar catheter (5 mm interelectrode distance) were examined.  Unipolar pacing was performed from each of the poles at late diastolic threshold, twice threshold and 10 mA at a cycle length of 500 ms.  In 15 patients, pacing was performed at the right ventricular apex and in 14 at various left ventricular sites.  Pacing from the distal catheter pole at threshold (index ECG) was used to simulate the site of origin of ventricular tachycardia, and all other ECGs were compared with the index ECG.  Electrocardiograms were evaluated by two independent observers for 1) minor configuration differences (notch, new small component, change in the amplitude of individual components or change in QRS shape); 2) major differences in configuration (new large component, marked change in the amplitude of an existing component or two minor changes); and 3) peak to peak changes in amplitude.  Minor differences in configuration were seen in a mean 2.4 +/- 1.9, 4.6 +/- 2.4 and 4.4 +/- 2.9 leads during pacing at 5, 10 and 15 mm from the distal electrode (index site).  Major differences in configuration were seen in a mean of 0.3 +/- 0.5, 2.1 +/- 2.1 and 3.7 +/- 2.3 leads during pacing at 5, 10 and 15 mm from the index site.  Differences in amplitude were seen in a mean of 3.1 +/- 2.2, 5.6 +/- 2.5 and 6.8 +/- 3.0 leads per ECG during pacing at 5, 10 and 15 mm from the index ECG pacing site, respectively.
Longitudinal dissociation of atrioventricular accessory pathways.  Unusual properties of atrioventricular (AV) accessory pathways were found during electrophysiologic investigations in four patients (three men and one woman).  Anterograde longitudinal dissociation of the accessory pathway was observed in two patients and retrograde longitudinal dissociation in two others.  Two patients had an accessory pathway with a slow conduction time, one in anterograde direction and one in retrograde direction.  These observations further expand our knowledge of the spectrum of electrophysiologic properties of accessory AV pathways.
Late noninvasive evaluation of cardiac performance in mildly symptomatic older patients with Ebstein's anomaly of tricuspid valve: role of radionuclide imaging.  Ten patients 8 to 54 years of age with isolated Ebstein's anomaly of the tricuspid valve were evaluated by electrocardiography, maximal exercise treadmill testing, 24 h electrocardiographic (ECG) monitoring, echocardiography and rest radionuclide imaging of the left ventricle.  The patients presented after the 1st year of life and had not undergone surgical intervention.  All except one were in functional class II.  No patient had preexcitation on the surface ECG, but abnormal tachyarrhythmias or bradyarrhythmias were seen in five patients on 24 h ECG monitoring.  Subnormal exercise performance was observed in five patients.  Echocardiography demonstrated typical variable tricuspid valve displacement and paradoxic interventricular septal motion.  Left ventricular end-diastolic dimensions were normal in all patients, but posterior wall motion was reduced in two.  Moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation with a Doppler jet velocity less than 2.5 m/s was demonstrated in eight patients.  Left ventricular radionuclide scintigraphy revealed a subnormal ejection fraction (less than 50%) in 5 of 10 patients; these 5 had previously shown suboptimal exercise performance.  The two youngest patients (less than 15 years) had no arrhythmia, normal exercise performance and normal left ventricular ejection fraction.  There was no correlation between the degree of tricuspid valve displacement or regurgitation and the presence of rhythm disturbance, exercise performance or radionuclide left ventricular function.  Late evaluation of patients with Ebstein's anomaly may demonstrate significant unsuspected abnormalities in cardiac rhythm, exercise performance and left ventricular function.  Radionuclide scintigraphy is a useful noninvasive technique for assessing left ventricular dysfunction in these patients.
In-hospital mortality after balloon aortic valvuloplasty: frequency and associated factors.  Percutaneous balloon aortic valvuloplasty has been accompanied by significant early periprocedural morbidity and mortality.  Identification of factors associated with increased mortality might allow for improved selection of patients.  The Mansfield Scientific Balloon Aortic Valvuloplasty Registry was analyzed to identify the frequency of in-hospital death and the factors associated with it.  Of 492 patients undergoing the procedure, 37 (7.5%) died during the hospital stay in which valvuloplasty was performed.  Twenty-four of these patients died within the first 24 h and the remainder died within 7 days after the procedure.  There were significant differences in baseline clinical and hemodynamic characteristics as well as procedural and postprocedural variables between patients dying and those surviving the in-hospital period.  Multivariate analysis identified four factors associated with increased mortality: 1) the occurrence of a procedure-related complication, 2) a lower initial left ventricular systolic pressure, 3) a smaller final aortic valve area, and 4) a lower baseline cardiac output.  Thus, baseline hemodynamic, procedural and postprocedural variables and complications can be identified that are associated with increased mortality.
Predictors of long-term survival after percutaneous aortic valvuloplasty: report of the Mansfield Scientific Balloon Aortic Valvuloplasty Registry.  Percutaneous balloon aortic valvuloplasty was used to prospectively treat 492 elderly, symptomatic, nonsurgical patients suffering from severe aortic stenosis in 27 centers in North America and Europe.  At 1 year the overall survival rate was 64% and the event-free survival rate (survival free of valve replacement or repeat valvuloplasty) was 43%.  Clinical, catheterization and procedural variables were assessed to define prognostic variables.  Univariate analysis revealed that patients who survived had a lesser frequency of previous myocardial infarction (2% versus 6%, p less than 0.005), lower incidence of severe ventricular dysfunction (22% versus 48%, p less than 0.001) and lower incidence of symptoms of heart failure (60% versus 75%, p less than 0.02).  History of angina (56% versus 45%, p = NS) and syncope (23% versus 16%, p = NS) were similar for both groups.  Values obtained at cardiac catheterization that differed in survivors and nonsurvivors included lower pulmonary artery systolic pressure (43 +/- 1 versus 54 +/- 2 mm Hg, p less than 0.001), lower mean pulmonary artery pressure (28 +/- 1.0 versus 36 +/- 1.0 mm Hg, p less than 0.001) and larger initial valve area (0.52 +/- 0.01 versus 0.47 +/- 0.02 cm2, p = 0.006).  Discriminate function analysis was performed to identify variables that independently predicted improved probability of survival.  Eight variables were significantly and independently predictive.  These included age, initial cardiac output, initial left ventricular systolic pressures, initial left ventricular end-diastolic pressures, presence of coronary artery disease, New York Heart Association dyspnea classification, number of balloon inflations and final valve area.
Ventricular load optimization by unloading therapy in patients with heart failure.  The effects of unloading a depressed heart were assessed in terms of optimal coupling between the ventricle and arterial system.  To assess the effects of preload on ventricular load coupling, preload was reduced with a lower body negative pressure of -20 mm Hg.  Nitroprusside was used to evaluate the effects of afterload on the coupling under the condition that preload reduction was comparable to that with lower body negative pressure.  In 13 patients with heart failure (ejection fraction 32 +/- 3%, mean +/- SE), direct arterial pressure was simultaneously recorded with the left ventricular echocardiogram as the pressure was elevated by phenylephrine.  Left ventricular contractile properties were defined by the slope (Ees) of the end-systolic pressure-volume relation.  The effective arterial elastance (Ea) was expressed by the slope of the end-systolic pressure-stroke volume relation.  Left ventricular external work, end-systolic potential energy and work efficiency, defined as external work per pressure volume area (external work + potential energy), were determined.  Baseline ventricular load coupling in these patients was characterized by an increase in the ratio of arterial elastance to ventricular elastance (Ea/Ees) (1.96 +/- 0.31).  This ratio decreased significantly, to 1.45 +/- 0.22, with nitroprusside, and increased to 2.37 +/- 0.34 with lower body negative pressure.  Therefore, end-systolic potential energy was decreased by nitroprusside but was unaltered by lower body negative pressure while external work was comparably decreased by both manipulations, indicating that work efficiency was significantly augmented with nitroprusside but declined with lower body negative pressure.
Cardiovascular and hormonal effects of calcitonin gene-related peptide in congestive heart failure.  The effects of infusing human alpha-calcitonin gene-related peptide were studied in eight patients with congestive heart failure, five normal rabbits and five rabbits with adriamycin-induced cardiomyopathy.  In patients with heart failure, calcitonin gene-related peptide caused a dose-dependent increase in cardiac output and decrease in pulmonary and systemic vascular resistance and pulmonary artery pressure.  The systemic blood pressure and right atrial and pulmonary wedge pressures decreased only at the highest infusion rate (16 ng/kg per min).  Heart rate remained unchanged.  Plasma epinephrine increased (p less than 0.05), whereas aldosterone, atrial natriuretic peptide and prolactin concentrations decreased (p less than 0.05).  Plasma norepinephrine, renin activity, cortisol and growth hormone concentrations remained unchanged.  In both groups of rabbits, the drug decreased blood pressure and increased cardiac output and heart rate.  There was a significant increase in renal blood flow (p less than 0.05).  The peptide did not affect the contraction amplitude of human and rabbit ventricular myocytes.  These findings suggest that calcitonin gene-related peptide is a vasodilator in the rabbit and humans with little direct effect on ventricular myocardium.  This peptide may be useful in some forms of heart failure.
Experimental pericardial effusion: relation of abnormal respiratory variation in mitral flow velocity to hemodynamics and diastolic right heart collapse   Pericardial effusion is associated with an abnormal increase in respiratory variation in mitral flow velocity.  However, the relation of the changes in flow velocity to pericardial pressure, hemodynamics and two-dimensional echocardiographic findings is not established.  Therefore, 11 sedated dogs with extensive hemodynamic instrumentation were studied with two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography during four stages of progressively larger pericardial effusion.  During all stages of effusion, respiratory variation in peak mitral flow velocity in early diastole and left ventricular isovolumetric relaxation time was increased compared with baseline (p less than 0.05).  This increase was seen at the earliest stage of effusion (mean pericardial pressure 4.2 +/- 1.4 versus -0.8 +/- 0.9 mm Hg at baseline, p less than 0.05), and preceded the appearance of unequivocal diastolic right heart collapse in every dog.  Maximal respiratory variation coincided with the appearance of right atrial collapse (mean pericardial pressure 7.1 +/- 2.4 mm Hg; mean inspiratory decrease in aortic pressure 9.5 +/- 2.6 mm Hg; mean aortic pressure 88.2 +/- 15.2 versus 102.2 +/- 11.2 mm Hg at baseline, p less than 0.05; and cardiac output 3.8 +/- 1.2 versus 5.5 +/- 1.3 liters/min at baseline, p less than 0.05), but did not increase at stages associated with more severe hemodynamic compromise.  In addition, the respiratory changes in peak mitral flow velocity in early diastole were associated with simultaneous changes in the diastolic transmitral pressure gradient.  It is concluded that in this model of acute pericardial effusion 1) increased respiratory variation in early diastolic mitral flow velocity, peak mitral flow velocity in early diastole and left ventricular isovolumetric relaxation time occurs almost immediately as pericardial pressure increases and persists at all stages of increasing pericardial effusion; 2) the abnormal respiratory variation occurs before equalization of intracardiac pressures and before the onset of unequivocal right heart collapse; 3) the respiratory variation occurs as a result of changes in the diastolic transmitral pressure gradient; and 4) the magnitude of the respiratory change is not necessarily predictive of pericardial pressure or severity of hemodynamic compromise, especially at the more severe stages of pericardial effusion.
Spontaneous alterations in coronary blood flow velocity before and after coronary angioplasty in patients with severe angina.  Cyclic coronary artery flow variations with a spontaneous decline in coronary blood flow to very low levels have been documented in stenosed canine coronary arteries with endothelial injury.  These flow variations are associated with transient platelet aggregation and dislodgment and the release of selected mediators, including thromboxane A2 and serotonin.  However, cyclic or spontaneous flow variations have not been demonstrated in stenosed coronary arteries in humans.  In this study, the hypothesis was tested that spontaneous coronary blood flow velocity variations occur in some patients with stenosed coronary arteries before or after coronary artery angioplasty.  Thus, 13 patients with severe and limiting angina underwent intracoronary pulsed Doppler velocimetry of their dilated artery immediately before and after percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty, whereas 9 control patients underwent velocimetry of an angiographically normal coronary artery.  A 3F catheter with a 20 MHz Doppler crystal was positioned to achieve a maximal stable signal, and the flow velocity signal was recorded continuously for 20 min.  Spontaneous flow velocity variations (greater than or equal to 38% change in Doppler frequency shift with wide morphologic changes) were present in 3 of the 13 patients tested.  Spontaneous flow velocity variations occurred before angioplasty in one patient, after angioplasty in another and both before and after angioplasty in a third.  In addition, 2 of the 13 patients, 1 with spontaneous coronary artery flow velocity variations before angioplasty, had frank vasospasm in an adjacent area just distal to the area of coronary dilation immediately after balloon inflation.  These data establish that spontaneous coronary artery flow velocity variations occur in some patients with severe and limiting angina before and after coronary angioplasty.  These variations may be related to platelet aggregation or coronary vasoconstriction, or both, at sites of endothelial injury resulting from plaque fissuring or ulceration and endothelial and medial injury occurring during coronary angioplasty.
Elevated plasma beta-endorphin levels in patients with congestive heart failure   Recent experimental studies show that the opioid system is important to the pathophysiology of cardiovascular impairment in congestive heart failure.  Plasma beta-endorphin levels were measured in 37 patients with congestive heart failure and compared with those of 21 age- and gender-matched normal subjects.  The relation of plasma beta-endorphin levels and cardiac function at rest and exercise capacity was assessed in 17 of the patients with dilated cardiomyopathy.  Exercise capacity was determined by symptom-limited maximal treadmill exercise with expired gas analysis.  Plasma beta-endorphin levels were elevated and correlated with the patients' New York Heart Association functional cardiac status (control: 14.0 +/- 4.4 pg/ml; class II: 17.9 +/- 3.6 pg/ml; class III: 28.3 +/- 8.8 pg/ml; class IV: 46.7 +/- 14.6 pg/ml, mean +/- SD).  No relation was found between plasma beta-endorphin levels and left ventricular systolic performance as assessed by M-mode and Doppler echocardiography.  Plasma beta-endorphin levels were negatively correlated with cardiac output determined by Doppler echocardiography and positively correlated with systemic vascular resistance (r = -0.733, r = 0.747, respectively, both p less than 0.001), but not correlated with calf blood flow as measured by a plethysmography.  A good correlation was found between plasma beta-endorphin levels at rest and exercise capacity.  The correlations with peak oxygen consumption, anaerobic threshold, and peak rate-pressure product were r = -0.721, -0.672, and -0.674, respectively (p less than 0.01).  The data show that plasma beta-endorphin levels are elevated in patients with congestive heart failure and reflect, to some degree, the severity of the disease.
Implications of echocardiographically assisted diagnosis of pericardial tamponade in contemporary medical patients: detection before hemodynamic embarrassment.  Identification of suspected pericardial tamponade and the decision to perform invasive drainage of the pericardial space have historically been based on classic bedside findings.  Two-dimensional echocardiography has improved detection of pericardial effusion, but it may be excessively sensitive in evaluation of patients for hemodynamic embarrassment.  Therefore, 50 consecutive medical patients were examined who were identified by echocardiography to have probable tamponade (defined as the presence of right heart chamber collapse in the presence of a pericardial effusion) and who underwent combined right-sided cardiac catheterization and percutaneous pericardiocentesis.  All patients had elevated pericardial pressure.  However, many had minimal evidence of hemodynamic compromise (94% had systolic blood pressure greater than or equal to 100 mm Hg and 58% had a cardiac index greater than or equal to 2.3 liters/min per m2).  Pericardiocentesis resulted in hemodynamic improvement, but frequently did not alleviate dyspnea or correct tachycardia.  Patients with malignancy as the cause of tamponade had a high mortality rate (the cumulative probability of survival in such patients was only 17% at 1 year).  Echocardiographically assisted diagnosis of pericardial tamponade in medical patients results in the identification of a substantial subset of patients with only subtle evidence of hemodynamic compromise.  This subset of patients differs sharply from medical patients described in previous reports with classic tamponade.  Although the patients can be managed by invasive catheter pericardiocentesis with few complications, the natural history and the optimal management strategy for this group are not resolved.
Recognition and embolic potential of intraaortic atherosclerotic debris.  Atherosclerotic disease of the thoracic aorta is common in the elderly and patients with clinical coronary artery disease.  Although embolization can occur from atherosclerotic debris within the thoracic aorta, it is not commonly considered in the differential diagnosis of the source of a systemic embolism.  In the current study, the prevalence, clinical significance and embolic potential of intraaortic atherosclerotic debris as detected by transesophageal echocardiography was determined.  Intraaortic atherosclerotic debris was identified in 38 (7%) of 556 patients undergoing transesophageal echocardiography.  An embolic event occurred among 11 (31%) of the 36 study patients with intraaortic atherosclerotic debris.  The incidence of an embolic event was higher when the debris was pedunculated and highly mobile (8 [73%] of 11 patients) than when it was layered and immobile (3 [12%] of 25 patients) (p less than 0.002).  Among 15 patients undergoing an invasive procedure of the aorta, the incidence of embolism was 27%.  In conclusion, in a patient with an embolic event, the thoracic aorta should be considered as a potential source.  Transesophageal echocardiography can reliably detect intraaortic atherosclerotic debris, and when it is identified, an invasive aortic procedure should be avoided if possible.
Coronary arterial remodeling studied by high-frequency epicardial echocardiography: an early compensatory mechanism in patients with obstructive coronary atherosclerosis.  Coronary arterial remodeling is a compensatory mechanism that may limit the adverse effects of coronary obstructive lesions by expansion of the entire vascular segment.  To determine if this compensatory anatomic change occurs in patients, high-frequency epicardial echocardiography using a 12 MHz transducer was performed during open heart surgery in 33 patients (10 with normal coronary arteries undergoing valvular surgery and 23 with coronary atherosclerosis).  From stop-frame videotape high-frequency epicardial echocardiographic images, cross-sectional measurements of luminal area and total arterial area (lumen, intima, media and dense adventitia) were made in the patients with atherosclerosis at the site of arterial lesions and from the most proximal portion of the same artery.  Remodeling was defined as enlargement of the total arterial area.  In normal arteries measurements were made from proximal and midarterial locations.  In the patients with normal coronary arteries, total arterial area, as determined by high-frequency echocardiography, decreased from the proximal site to the midportion of the artery (from 10.4 +/- 0.9 to 8.4 +/- 1.0 mm2, p less than 0.05); luminal area also decreased (from 6.0 +/- 0.6 to 4.5 +/- 0.7 mm2, p less than 0.05).  In patients with coronary arterial lesions, luminal area also decreased from the proximal site to the arterial lesion site (from 5.3 +/- 0.6 to 2.3 +/- 0.3 mm2, p less than 0.05), but total arterial area increased (from 11.6 +/- 1.0 to 13.0 +/- 1.0 mm2, p less than 0.05).  Of the 25 coronary arteries evaluated, only 4 had angiographic evidence of coronary collateral formation.  These data indicate that coronary arterial remodeling is an important compensatory mechanism in obstructive coronary disease.
Detection of coronary blood flow associated with left main coronary artery stenosis by transesophageal Doppler color flow echocardiography.  Demonstration of disordered blood flow in a coronary artery may be helpful in anticipating the presence of stenosis.  To examine the possibility of disordered coronary blood flow associated with left main coronary stenosis, left main coronary flow was visualized by transesophageal Doppler color flow echocardiography in 52 patients undergoing coronary angiography.  Twenty patients had significant left main coronary stenosis (Group 1) and 32 patients did not (Group 2).  Adequate two-dimensional echocardiographic images of the left main coronary artery were obtained in 17 patients in Group 1 and 30 patients in Group 2.  Sixteen patients in Group 1, including five patients in whom the stenosis could not clearly be defined by two-dimensional echocardiography, exhibited the aliased reddish-yellowish elements producing the mosaic pattern at the stenotic or poststenotic segments, or both.  In contrast, nonaliased bluish jets, suggesting laminar flow away from the transducer, were seen in echocardiograms from 27 patients in Group 2.  This group included four patients with stenosis-like images on two-dimensional echocardiography.  The aliased mosaic pattern was found in only three patients in Group 2 (p less than 0.01).  Thus, sensitivity to detect the stenosis was improved when Doppler color flow imaging was applied.  Flow velocity was significantly higher at the site of stenosis in patients in Group 1 (116 +/- 28 cm/s, n = 10, mean +/- SD) than in Group 2 (29 +/- 12 cm/s, n = 21, p less than 0.01), suggesting that the augmentation of flow velocity with or without turbulence due to the stenosis contributed to the appearance of the mosaic flow images.
Forearm blood flow response to posture change in the very old: non-invasive measurement by venous occlusion plethysmography.  Little is known about the peripheral vascular response to posture change in very elderly people who are vulnerable to the development of orthostatic hypotension.  This is due, in part, to the risks of currently utilized invasive vascular monitoring techniques in the elderly population.  We studied the forearm vascular response to active standing in 18 healthy young, 10 healthy old, and 19 impaired elderly subjects, using the non-invasive technique of venous occlusion plethysmography.  In six subjects this technique was compared to duplex doppler ultrasonography for the measurement of postural changes in forearm blood flow.  Forearm blood flow changes determined by venous occlusion plethysmography were 11% larger than doppler measurements, but the two methods strongly correlated (r = 0.90, P less than .001).  Mean forearm vascular resistance increased to a significantly greater extent at 1 minute of standing in young subjects than in both groups of old, although the response was quite variable in all groups.  Two healthy elderly (20%) and eight impaired elderly (40%) subjects had unexpected forearm vasodilatation at 1 minute of standing.  By 3 minutes, forearm vascular resistance had increased by similar amounts in all three groups of subjects.  Five impaired elderly and no healthy young or healthy old subjects had orthostatic hypotension, defined as greater than or equal to 10 mm Hg decline in mean arterial blood pressure at 1 or 3 minutes of standing.  Forearm vascular resistance changes did not correlate with blood pressure response to standing.  Thus, forearm vascular response to 1 minute of active standing is attenuated in many elderly subjects.  This abnormality may impair adaptation to orthostatic stress in advanced age.
Ostium secundum atrial septal defect in the elderly.  Atrial septal defect (ASD) is one of the most common congenital cardiac anomalies in adults.  Life expectancy is shortened, and almost 90% of patients die by the age of 60 years.  The progression of this congenital disease to congestive heart failure has been related to several factors such as the onset of pulmonary hypertension, arrhythmias, bronchopulmonary infections, or the development of other cardiovascular disease.  We describe three cases of very old patients with significant ASDs and late development of symptoms.  Given the higher risks and poorer long-term results of surgical closure of the defect in advanced age, the indications for such an intervention in elderly patients should be carefully evaluated.
Arterial aneurysms in children: clinicopathologic classification.  Thirty-one arterial macroaneurysms in 23 pediatric-aged patients (16 boys and 7 girls) were treated at the University of Michigan.  The average age at time of diagnosis was 10.2 years (range 6 months to 18 years).  Vessels involved the aorta (4), as well as hepatic (1), splenic (2), gastroepiploic (1), renal (12), iliac (1), superficial femoral (4), popliteal (1), brachial (1), radial (2), and ulnar (2) arteries.  Twelve children exhibited overt clinical manifestations including presence of a mass (7), local pain (3), hematemesis (1), and painless obstructive jaundice (1).  Eleven children had asymptomatic lesions.  Aneurysm existence was confirmed by arteriography or operation.  All but one child underwent surgical therapy, with 20 long-term survivors (mean follow-up 3.5 years).  One operative death occurred and one death occurred 6 years after surgery.  This experience and a review of previously reported cases served as a basis for categorization of childhood aneurysmal disease as true aneurysms associated with (I) arterial infection, (II) giant-cell aortoarteritis, (III) autoimmune connective tissue disease, (IV) Kawasaki's disease, (V) Ehlers-Danlos syndrome or Marfan's syndrome, (VI) other forms of noninflammatory medial degeneration, (VII) arterial dysplasias, (VIII) congenital-idiopathic factors, as well as (IX) false aneurysms associated with extravascular events causing vessel wall injury or disruption.  Knowledge of the varied clinicopathologic characteristics of arterial aneurysms in children is important in treating these patients.
The role of duplex scanning in the selection of patients for transluminal angioplasty.  As part of our initial evaluation to determine whether patients with lower extremity ischemia are candidates for intervention, arterial duplex examinations are performed in the noninvasive vascular laboratory.  Patients with isolated short stenoses on the duplex examination are referred for transluminal angioplasty.  One hundred thirty-four arteriograms were performed for ischemic peripheral vascular disease in 122 patients between July 1987 and March 1990.  One hundred ten (82%) of the arteriograms were preceded by a lower extremity arterial duplex evaluation.  Fifty cases (45%) were scheduled for transluminal angioplasty based on the findings of the duplex examination.  Transluminal angioplasty was performed in 47 of 50 cases (94%).  No significant differences in age, sex, or diabetes were found between the patients who were referred for transluminal angioplasty and those who were not.  These data demonstrate that duplex scanning of the lower extremities allows the detection of lesions that will be amenable to transluminal angioplasty.  We think that duplex scanning should become the standard screening tool for detection of treatable lower extremity lesions.
Ultrasound screening of first-degree relatives of patients with an abdominal aortic aneurysm.  The pedigrees were constructed of 43 patients (probands) who underwent resection of an abdominal aortic aneurysm.  Seven probands (16.2%) had a first-degree relative (parent, sibling, child) known to have had an abdominal aortic aneurysm (multiplex family).  To determine the prevalence of undiagnosed abdominal aortic aneurysm, ultrasound screening of first-degree relatives over age 40 years was undertaken.  Of 202 eligible relatives, 103 (51.0%) were screened.  An occult abdominal aortic aneurysm was defined as an infrarenal aortic diameter greater than 3.0 cm or an infrarenal/suprarenal aortic diameter ratio of greater than 1.5.  An incipient abdominal aortic aneurysm was defined as a clear focal bulge of the infrarenal aorta, which was less than 3.0 cm in greatest diameter.  Four of 103 relatives (3.9%) were found to have an occult abdominal aortic aneurysm (age/sex: 57M, 60M, 62F, 65M), and three (2.9%) were found with an incipient abdominal aortic aneurysm (age/sex: 56M, 60M, 67F).  These smaller abdominal aortic aneurysms were in patients younger than the operated probands (average age men, 67 years; women, 69 years).  Six of seven individuals were in families previously considered simplex, increasing the actual multiplex family frequency from 16.2% to 27.9%.  All seven new abdominal aortic aneurysms were found in the 49 siblings age 55 years or older.  There were no abdominal aortic aneurysms found in the 39 relatives under age 55 years, in 14 children ages 50 to 59 years or in one parent.  Therefore of the siblings age 55 years or older, 5/20 men (25.0%) and 2/29 women (6.9%) were found to have a previously undiagnosed abdominal aortic aneurysm.
The influence of elastic compression stockings on deep venous hemodynamics.  To determine the effect of elastic compression stockings on deep venous hemodynamics we measured ambulatory venous pressure, venous refill time, maximum venous pressure with exercise, amplitude of venous pressure excursion, and duplex-derived common femoral and popliteal vein diameter and peak flow velocities with and without stockings in 10 healthy subjects and 16 patients with chronic deep venous insufficiency.  The effects of below-knee and above-knee 30 to 40 torr and 40 to 50 torr gradient stockings were studied.  Despite documentation of substantial stocking compressive effects by skin pressure measurements, neither below-knee or above-knee elastic compression stockings significantly improved ambulatory venous pressure, venous refill time, maximum venous pressure with exercise, or the amplitude of venous pressure excursion in healthy patients or in patients with deep venous insufficiency (p greater than 0.05).  In patients with deep venous insufficiency stockings modestly increased popliteal vein diameter and flow velocity in the upright resting position (p less than 0.02).  After tiptoe exercise without stockings deep venous peak flow velocity increased in healthy patients and in patients with deep venous insufficiency by a mean of 103% in the popliteal vein and 46% in the common femoral vein (p less than 0.01).  With the application of elastic compression stockings only modest augmentation of deep venous flow velocity occurred in both groups above that seen in the bare leg after exercise.  Thus elastic compression stockings did not improve deep venous hemodynamic measurements in patients with deep venous insufficiency.  The beneficial effects of stockings in the treatment of deep venous insufficiency must relate to effects other than changes in deep venous hemodynamics.
The association of skin color with blood pressure in US blacks with low socioeconomic status   To determine the association of skin color, measured by a reflectometer, with blood pressure in US blacks, we studied a community sample of 457 blacks from three US cities.  Persons taking antihypertensive medications were excluded.  Both systolic and diastolic blood pressure were higher in darker persons and increased by 2 mm Hg for every 1-SD increase in skin darkness.  However, the association was dependent on socioeconomic status, whether measured by education or an index consisting of education, occupation, and ethnicity, being present only in person with lower levels of either indicator.  Using multiple linear regression, both systolic and diastolic blood pressure remained significantly associated with darker skin color in the lower levels of socioeconomic status, independent of age, body mass index, and concentrations of blood glucose, serum urea nitrogen, serum uric acid, and urinary sodium and potassium.  The association of skin color with blood pressure only in low socioeconomic strata may be due to the lesser ability of such groups to deal with the psychosocial stress associated with darker skin color.  However, these findings also are consistent with an interaction between an environmental factor associated with low socioeconomic status and a susceptible gene that has a higher prevalence in persons with darker skin color.
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate in congestive heart failure.  BACKGROUND AND METHODS.  Physicians have long believed that the erythrocyte sedimentation rate is low in patients with congestive heart failure, but this concept is based on a misinterpretation of the results in a single report published in 1936.  To reevaluate this concept in the modern era, we measured the sedimentation rate in 242 patients who were referred for treatment of chronic heart failure.  RESULTS.  The sedimentation rate was low (less than 5 mm per hour) in only 24 patients (10 percent) but was increased (above 25 mm per hour) in 50 percent.  Patients with low or normal sedimentation rates (less than or equal to 25 mm per hour) had more severe hemodynamic abnormalities than patients with elevated rates: lower cardiac index (mean +/- SEM, 1.7 +/- 0.1 vs.  2.0 +/- 0.1 liters per minute per square meter of body-surface area) and higher mean right atrial pressure (mean +/- SEM, 12 +/- 1 vs.  9 +/- 1 mm Hg) (both P less than 0.0001).  New York Heart Association functional class IV symptoms were present in 66 percent of the patients with a low or normal sedimentation rate, as compared with 42 percent of those with elevated rates (P less than 0.0001).  After one to three months of therapy, patients whose sedimentation rates decreased showed little hemodynamic or clinical response to treatment, whereas both cardiac performance and functional status improved in patients whose rates increased (P less than 0.02 for the comparison between groups).  The sedimentation rate was correlated with the plasma fibrinogen level (r = 0.64, P = 0.0025), and changes in the sedimentation rate during treatment were correlated inversely with changes in mean right atrial pressure (r = -0.57, P = 0.0002).  During long-term follow-up, patients with low or normal sedimentation rates had a worse one-year survival than patients with elevated rates (41 vs.  66 percent, P = 0.01).  CONCLUSIONS.  These data indicate that the erythrocyte sedimentation rate is correlated with the severity of illness in patients with chronic heart failure.  Because of its lack of discriminatory power, however, the test is of limited value in the clinical management of this disorder.
Circadian rhythms in blood pressure in school-age children of normotensive and hypertensive parents.  The purpose of this study was to describe the characteristics of blood pressure rhythms in school-age children and to compare the circadian mesors and amplitudes between children of normotensive parents and children of hypertensive parents.  The sample consisted of 40 healthy children between 8 and 10 years old; 20 children had a parental history of hypertension and 20 did not.  Blood pressure was measured every 2 hours during the day and every 90 minutes during the night for one 24-hour cycle using a Dinamap monitor equipped with an automatic printer.  Cosinor analyses revealed statistically significant circadian rhythms for systolic and diastolic blood pressures in 12 of the 40 subjects.  The acrophases for systolic and diastolic pressures occurred between 1200-1800 hours.  The mean systolic mesor was 108.50 while the mean diastolic mesor was 61.41.  The mean amplitudes were 8.85 for systolic pressure and 7.44 for diastolic pressure.  No statistically significant differences in circadian mesors and amplitudes between children of normotensive parents and children of hypertensive parents were found.
Cineangiography of the heart in a single breath hold with a segmented turboFLASH sequence.  Six healthy volunteers and three patients with cardiac anomalies were studied in a comparison of segmented turboFLASH (fast low-angle shot) cine, a method of magnetic resonance imaging that permits an entire series of high-resolution cine images to be obtained in one breath hold, with standard cine.  Segmented turboFLASH uses a gradient-echo sequence designed for short imaging times in combination with a segmented data acquisition method.  Presaturation pulses were applied to eliminate the blood pool signal; the signal-to-noise ratio was assessed with a phantom.  Standard hardware and image reconstruction methods were used.  The breath-hold images consistently showed reduced ghosting and blurring from respiration.  Because a very short echo time was used, segmented turboFLASH was relatively insensitive to dephasing caused by local field disturbances or flow.  The authors conclude that, by reducing imaging times and eliminating respiratory artifact, segmented turboFLASH can be useful for performing cine studies of the heart and great vessels.
Gynecologic vascular abnormalities: diagnosis with Doppler US.  The authors describe the use of duplex and/or color Doppler ultrasonography of the pelvis in three women to demonstrate the presence of venous malformations.  One patient with a pulsatile vaginal mass was shown to have an arteriovenous malformation of the vaginal wall.  The second patient was shown to have an unsuspected venous angioma in the endometrial cavity.  The third patient was shown to have adnexal varices that closely mimicked hydrosalpinx.  In the latter two cases, the duplex and color flow capabilities of an endovaginal probe were especially important.
Noninvasive assessment of cerebral collateral blood supply through the ophthalmic artery.  We assessed the potential of 2-MHz pulsed-wave transorbital Doppler ultrasonography to delineate the role of the ophthalmic artery as a source of collateral cerebral blood supply by comparing oculopneumoplethysmography, transorbital Doppler ultrasonography, periorbital continuous-wave Doppler ultrasonography, and transcranial Doppler ultrasonography in 25 patients with unilateral internal carotid artery occlusion and five controls with 10 normal internal carotid arteries.  Systolic ophthalmic artery blood velocity was reduced ipsilateral to an internal carotid artery occlusion (38.2 +/- 10.2 cm/sec) compared with the contralateral and control velocities (46.0 +/- 10.3 and 47.5 +/- 6.8 cm/sec, respectively; p less than 0.05).  Ophthalmic systolic pressure measured by oculopneumoplethysmography was 94.7 +/- 13.2 mm Hg ipsilateral to an internal carotid artery occlusion compared with 108.4 +/- 15.3 mm Hg on the contralateral side (p less than 0.01).  Transorbital and periorbital Doppler ultrasonography detected reversed ophthalmic artery blood flow ipsilateral to an internal carotid artery occlusion in 44.0% and 40.0% of the patients, respectively.  Systolic middle cerebral artery blood velocity was 55.2 +/- 22.3 cm/sec ipsilateral to an internal carotid artery occlusion compared with 79.4 +/- 23.5 cm/sec on the contralateral side (p less than 0.05) and 101.2 +/- 18.9 cm/sec in the controls (p less than 0.05).  Reversed ophthalmic artery blood flow was associated with a low middle cerebral artery blood velocity and lack of major intracerebral collaterals.  Transorbital Doppler ultrasonography permits noninvasive evaluation of the ophthalmic artery.
Interpreting results of exercise studies after acute myocardial infarction altered by thrombolytic therapy, coronary angioplasty or bypass.  Numerous studies have assessed the ability of exercise modalities to predict patient outcome after acute myocardial infarction (AMI).  Implicit in the use of these prior data to assess the prognosis of patients currently undergoing exercise studies is the assumption that patients selected for exercise assessment are similar over time and that the data generated in the past are therefore applicable to the current patient populations.  This study retrospectively assessed the clinical, exercise, and rest and exercise radionuclide angiographic data in 791 consecutive patients referred for exercise radionuclide angiography within 1 month after AMI during a 5-year period to determine if the clinical and exercise characteristics of patients referred for exercise evaluation after infarction have changed significantly over time.  Most parameters examined demonstrated significant increasing trends, including thrombolytic therapy at the time of AMI, revascularization procedure between AMI and exercise assessment, age, beta-blocker usage, Q-wave AMI, inferior infarction, exercise double product, exercise capacity, significant ST-segment depression with exercise, peak ejection fraction, and change in ejection fraction with exercise.  These data indicate that the characteristics of patients selected to undergo exercise after AMI in a large referral center have changed significantly over time.  If these data are applicable to other referral centers and to other exercise testing modalities, previously published results regarding exercise assessment after AMI will need to be reconfirmed in patients currently selected for testing, since these results may no longer be applicable in this current era of aggressive medical and interventional management.
Effect of nifedipine on total ischemic activity and circadian distribution of myocardial ischemic episodes in angina pectoris.  A randomized, double-blind, crossover study was conducted in 10 patients to assess the effect of nifedipine versus placebo on total ischemic activity and circadian distribution of ischemic episodes.  After baseline exercise treadmill testing and 48-hour ambulatory electrocardiographic ST-segment monitoring, patients received either nifedipine (mean dose, 80 mg/day) or placebo administered 4 times per day, with the initial dose taken immediately upon arising in the morning.  Patients were maintained on a stable dose of each study drug for 7 days, after which they underwent repeat exercise treadmill testing and 48-hour ambulatory electrocardiography.  During exercise treadmill testing, greater exercise duration was achieved by patients receiving nifedipine than by those receiving placebo (421 +/- 121 vs 353 +/- 155 seconds, respectively; p less than 0.05).  Time to greater than or equal to 1 mm ST depression was significantly greater with nifedipine (282 +/- 146 seconds) than at baseline (130 +/- 72 seconds, p less than 0.003) and with placebo (150 +/- 98 seconds, p less than 0.0005).  During ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring, nifedipine reduced both the total number of ischemic episodes (18 vs 54 at baseline and 63 with placebo; p less than 0.02 for both) and the total duration of ischemia (260 vs 874 at baseline and 927 minutes with placebo; p less than 0.02 for both).  The surge of ischemia between 06:00 and 12:00 noted at baseline and during placebo therapy was nearly abolished during nifedipine treatment.  Nifedipine at this dosage, administered in this manner, is effective in reducing total ischemic activity and may prevent morning surges of ischemic episodes.
Ablation of the atrioventricular junction with radiofrequency energy using a new electrode catheter.  Percutaneous catheter ablation using radiofrequency energy can be used to interrupt atrioventricular (AV) conduction in patients with supraventricular tachycardia refractory to drugs.  Results of radiofrequency ablation of the AV junction using a custom-designed catheter with a large, 3-mm-long distal electrode, 2-mm interelectrode spacing, and a shaft with increased torsional rigidity were compared with those using a standard quadripolar electrode catheter (Bard EP).  An electrocoagulator (Microvasive Bicap 4005) supplied unmodulated radiofrequency current at 550 kHz, which was applied between the distal electrode of the ablation catheter and a large skin electrode.  With use of the modified catheter, 12 of 13 patients (92%) had persistent complete AV block induced with 7 +/- 5 applications of 18 +/- 6 W of radiofrequency power.  In contrast, complete AV block was produced in only 9 of 18 (50%) historical control patients treated with the standard catheter, despite a similar number of applications (7 +/- 5) and power output (16 +/- 4 W).  A rise in impedance, due to desiccation of tissue and coagulum formation, occurred earlier (28 +/- 18 vs 52 +/- 24 seconds, p less than 0.001) and more frequently (54 vs 40% of applications, p = 0.047) in patients treated with the standard catheter than in patients treated with the modified catheter.  The use of a catheter designed to increase the surface area of electrode-tissue contact allows more radiofrequency energy to be delivered before a rise in impedance occurs and appears to increase the effectiveness of radiofrequency ablation of the AV junction.
Relative importance of activation sequence compared to atrioventricular synchrony in left ventricular function.  This study evaluated the relative hemodynamic importance of a normal left ventricular (LV) activation sequence compared to atrioventricular (AV) synchrony with respect to systolic and diastolic function.  Twelve patients with intact AV conduction and AV sequential pacemakers underwent radionuclide studies at rest and Doppler echocardiographic studies at rest and during submaximal exercise, comparing atrial demand pacing (AAI) to sequential AV sensing pacing (DDD) and ventricular demand pacing (VVI).  Studies at rest were performed at a constant heart rate between pacing modes, and the exercise study was performed at a constant heart rate and work load.  Cardiac output was higher during AAI than during both DDD and VVI (6.2 +/- 1 vs 5.6 +/- 1 and 5.3 +/- 1 liters/min, p less than 0.05).  LV ejection fraction was likewise higher during AAI (55 +/- 12 vs 49 +/- 11 vs 51 +/- 13, p less than 0.05).  VVI with or without AV synchrony was associated with a paradoxical septal motion pattern, resulting in a 25% impairment of regional septal ejection fraction.  In addition, LV contraction duration was more homogenous during AAI.  Peak filling rate during AAI and VVI was higher than during DDD (2.86 +/- 1 and 2.95 +/- 1 vs 2.25 +/- 1 end-diastolic volume/s; p less than 0.05).  During VVI, the time to peak filling was significantly shorter than during both AAI and DDD (165 +/- 34 vs 239 +/- 99 and 224 +/- 99 ms; p less than 0.05).
Effects of doxazosin on blood pressure, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone and urinary kallikrein.  Doxazosin, a new quinazoline-derivative postsynaptic alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonist, was studied in this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 12-week study.  Its effects on blood pressure (BP), heart rate, metabolic functions and renal hormones were analyzed after administration of a single oral morning dose in a 3-phase fashion when administered to 17 patients (11 women, 6 men, 21 to 59 years) with mild to moderate uncomplicated essential hypertension.  After titrating the antihypertensive effective dose biweekly from 1 to 8 mg/day and a mean end titration-point dose of 4.14 +/- 0.1 mg (mean +/- standard error of the mean) at week 8 of treatment, it was adjusted to maintain diastolic BP at levels less than or equal to 90 mm Hg for up to 12 weeks of treatment when, at a final mean dose of 4.35 +/- 0.2 mg/day, BP decreased in all patients by a mean 31 +/- 3/17 +/- 2 (supine) and 39 +/- 3/15 +/- 3 (standing) mm Hg (p less than 0.005) with no increase in heart rate and no "first-dose phenomenon." Neither the renin-aldosterone system nor electrolyte excretion was significantly affected.  Renal function and metabolic parameters also remained unchanged.  Urinary kallikrein excretion was augmented 2.47-fold (p less than 0.002).  There was good tolerance; 1 patient discontinued the study because of dry nose.  These results suggest that long-term monotherapy with doxazosin is an effective and safe antihypertensive agent for mild to moderate essential hypertension that stimulates urinary kallikrein excretion.
Effect of mitral regurgitation and volume loading on pressure half-time before and after balloon valvotomy in mitral stenosis.  Doppler pressure half-time (PHT) is frequently used to assess mitral valve area (MVA), but the reliability of PHT has recently been challenged, specifically in the setting of balloon mitral valvotomy when hemodynamics have been abruptly altered.  The effect of volume loading both before and after balloon mitral valvotomy on computation of MVA by Gorlin and by PHT in 18 patients with high-fidelity micromanometer measurements of left atrial and left ventricular pressure was therefore examined.  Echocardiographic MVA increased from 0.91 +/- 0.15 to 1.97 +/- 0.42 cm2 after valvotomy.  Volume loading produced significant increases in left atrial pressure (16 to 23 before and 12 to 20 mm Hg after valvotomy), in cardiac output (3.7 to 4.1 before and 3.9 to 4.6 liters/min after valvotomy), and in mitral valve gradient (11 to 14 before and 5 to 7 mm Hg after valvotomy).  These hemodynamic changes were associated with modest but significant decreases in PHT and increases in MVA estimated by 220/PHT (0.66 to 0.81 before and 1.64 to 1.96 cm2 after valvotomy), whereas the MVA by Gorlin was not affected in a consistent fashion by volume loading (0.85 to 0.89 before and 1.66 to 1.69 cm2 after valvotomy).  The correlation between Gorlin MVA and 220/PHT was only fair (r = 0.73, p less than 0.001) and was significantly poorer among patients with greater than 1+ mitral regurgitation (r = 0.72) than among those with less or no regurgitation (r = 0.79) (p = 0.001 by analysis of covariance for mitral regurgitation effect).
Rarity of preclinical alcoholic cardiomyopathy in chronic alcoholics less than 40 years of age.  Preclinical alcoholic cardiomyopathy, myocardial damage in the absence of overt congestive heart failure in chronic alcoholics, is well characterized at necropsy, but attempts to identify such a clinical entity before death have produced conflicting results.  Studying subjects only at rest, the inclusion of older alcoholics and limitations of noninvasive techniques may explain some of the disagreement.  To determine if preclinical alcoholic cardiomyopathy could be identified independent of the aforementioned limitations, 25 asymptomatic chronic alcoholics aged less than 40 years (mean 34), each of whom had consumed a minimum of 1 pint of whiskey or one 6-pack of beer greater than or equal to 5 days per week for greater than or equal to 5 years, underwent radionuclide ventriculography for measurements of systolic and diastolic function at rest, peak supine exercise and during recovery, and echocardiography for assessment of chamber size, wall thickness and left ventricular mass.  Red blood cell levels of selenium and thiamine were measured to determine whether abnormalities were present in these 2 potential mediators of alcoholic cardiomyopathy.  For comparison, an age-matched group of healthy control subjects was also studied.  For alcoholics and control subjects at rest, mean ejection fraction (67 +/- 7% vs 71 +/- 6%) and diastolic peak filling rate (3.4 +/- 0.6 vs 3.3 +/- 0.6 end-diastolic volumes per second [EDV/s]) were similar.
Prognostic value of thallium-201 perfusion defects in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.  To assess the prognostic significance of thallium-201 perfusion defects in patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (IDC), 43 patients underwent thallium scintigraphy in addition to clinical, echocardiographic, angiographic and hemodynamic evaluation.  Eleven patients had no significant thallium perfusion abnormality, 19 had multiple small defects and 13 had a large defect.  During 3.2 +/- 2.2 years, 14 patients had disease-related mortality.  The patients who died had a higher incidence of ventricular tachycardia (71 vs 31%; p less than 0.02), increased cardiothoracic ratio (60 +/- 6 vs 54 +/- 6; p = 0.005), decreased fractional shortening (11 +/- 6 vs 15 +/- 5; p less than 0.05), increased pulmonary wedge pressure (15 +/- 7 vs 10 +/- 6 mm Hg; p = 0.05), increased left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (21 +/- 8 vs 14 +/- 6 mm Hg; p = 0.02) and abnormal thallium perfusion defects (13 of 14 vs 16 of 26; p less than 0.05) compared with survivors.  Age, gender, left ventricular end-systolic and end-diastolic dimensions, cardiac index and ejection fraction were not statistically different in the survivors versus the patients who died.  Kaplan-Meier survival estimates at 1, 3 and 5 years were 100% in patients without significant perfusion abnormality; 89, 77 and 64%, respectively, in patients with multiple small defects; and 84, 76 and 30%, respectively, in patients with a large defect (p less than 0.025 by log rank test).
An unusual venous anomaly of the placenta.  The authors present an unusual vascular anomaly of the placenta.  The placenta was very large, weighing 1,490 g.  On the fetal surface, numerous dilated and tortuous vessels were observed on and under the chorionic membrane, of which three branches arose from a vein that was connected to the umbilical vein.  One of them had a 5 x 2.5 cm aneurysmal dilatation, where three secondary branches arose.  These venous channels were dilated and tortuous.  The longest secondary branch was 133 cm in length and 1.2 cm in mean diameter and led into the placenta.  Multiple, severely coiled or straight small branches arising from these vessels were also observed as vascular tangles.  Some of these smaller vessels also led into the placenta.  All abnormal vessels were veins.  The umbilical cord was also normal except for a membranous insertion, and the placenta was unremarkable except for its large size.
A systemic non-lytic state and local thrombolytic failure of anistreplase (anisoylated plasminogen streptokinase activator complex, APSAC) in acute myocardial infarction.  The relation between coronary thrombolysis and coagulation variables after administration of anistreplase (anisoylated plasminogen streptokinase activator complex, APSAC) was studied in patients with an acute myocardial infarction.  Fifty eight consecutive patients with acute myocardial infarction were given 30 U of anistreplase intravenously within 4 hours of the onset of symptoms.  A fall in the plasma concentration fibrinogen to less than 1.0 g/l 90 minutes after administration of anistreplase was considered to reflect a systemic lytic state.  Coronary angiography was performed 48 hours after thrombolytic treatment.  The overall patency rate was 74% (43/58).  Patency rates were significantly different in patients with a systemic lytic (83% (43/52)) and a systemic non-lytic state (0% (0/6)).  The absence of a systemic lytic state after anistreplase administration seemed to be highly predictive of the failure of coronary thrombolysis.  Coagulation studies showed evidence of inhibition of anistreplase induced fibrinolytic activity which may explain the failure of thrombolytic treatment in patients with evidence of a systemic non-lytic state.
Dipyridamole magnetic resonance imaging: a comparison with thallium-201 emission tomography.  Limitation of space and motion artefact make magnetic resonance imaging during dynamic exercise difficult.  Pharmacological stress with dipyridamole can be used as an alternative to exercise for thallium scanning.  Forty patients with a history of angina and an abnormal exercise electrocardiogram were studied by dipyridamole thallium myocardial perfusion tomography and dipyridamole magnetic resonance wall motion imaging with a cine gradient refocused sequence.  Images for both scans were obtained in the oblique horizontal and vertical long axis and short axis planes before and after pharmacological stress with dipyridamole.  The myocardium was divided into nine segments for direct comparison of perfusion with wall motion.  Segments were assessed visually into grades--normal, hypokinesis or reduced perfusion, and akinesis or very reduced perfusion.  After dipyridamole there were reversible wall motion abnormalities in 24 (62%) of 39 patients with coronary artery disease and 24 (67%) of 36 patients with reversible thallium defects.  The site of wall motion deterioration was always the site of a reversible thallium defect.  Thallium defects affecting more than two segments were always associated with wall motion deterioration but most single segment thallium defects were undetected by magnetic resonance imaging.  There was a significant correlation between detection of wall motion abnormality, the angiographic severity of coronary artery disease, and the induction of chest pain by dipyridamole.  There were no significant differences in ventricular volume or ejection fraction changes after dipyridamole between the groups with and without detectable reversible wall motion changes but the normalised magnetic resonance signal intensity of the abnormally moving segments was significantly less than the signal intensity of the normal segments.
A controlled trial of community based coronary rehabilitation.  Two hundred patients who had suffered an acute myocardial infarction 4-6 weeks before entered a randomised controlled trial of exercise treatment at a community sports centre supervised by a general practitioner.  Eighty one per cent of the treatment group continued to exercise until they returned to work and 73% completed three months' exercise.  There were no serious complications of the exercise course.  The prevalence of angina pectoris fell by 10% in the treatment group but rose by 60% in the control group.  The perceived energy level rose by significantly more in the treatment group than in the controls.  The rise in predicted maximum oxygen uptake was significantly greater in the treatment group than in the control group as was the reduction in the double product (a reflection of myocardial workload) at peak exercise.  Coronary rehabilitation in the community can be both safe and effective.
A new method of haemodynamic assessment of mitral stenosis in atrial fibrillation: construction of a nomogram.  Accurate haemodynamic assessment of mitral stenosis by hydraulic formulas requires measurement of the mean valve gradient and the cardiac output.  The calculation is laborious, particularly in the presence of atrial fibrillation when averaged values obtained from multiple beat-to-beat determinations must be used.  The relations between valve area, end diastolic gradient, and heart rate in 20 patients with mitral stenosis and atrial fibrillation were examined.  In each patient the end diastolic pressure gradient for each cardiac cycle was related linearly to the RR interval of that cycle, and this relation was unchanged on exercise.  The slope (S) and intercept (I) of this relation correlated with the degree of mitral stenosis as measured by the Gorlin valve area.  The regression equations describing these relations were then used to construct a nomogram relating end diastolic pressure gradient to mitral valve area at different heart rates.  When the nomogram was applied to catheterisation data from a further 30 patients the results correlated well with direct calculation of valve area by the Gorlin formula.  The nomogram is simple to use, does not require measurement of cardiac output, and is independent of heart rate so that it is unnecessary for the patient to exercise during catheterisation.
Lipoprotein (a) and coronary heart disease: a prospective case-control study in a general population sample of middle aged men.  OBJECTIVE--To examine the association between the serum lipoprotein (a) concentration and subsequent coronary heart disease.  DESIGN--Prospective case-control study based on a six year follow up of a general population sample of men aged 50 at baseline in 1983-4.  Serum samples were frozen at the time of the baseline examination and kept at -70 degrees C for six years, after which the lipoprotein (a) concentrations in the samples were measured in cases and controls.  SETTING--City of Gothenburg, Sweden.  SUBJECTS--26 Men, from a general population sample of 776 men, who had sustained a myocardial infarction or died of coronary heart disease during the six years and 109 randomly selected controls from the same sample who had remained free of myocardial infarction.  In neither cases nor controls was there a history of myocardial infarction at baseline.  MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES--Proportion of myocardial infarction or deaths from coronary heart disease, or both, in relation to the serum lipoprotein (a) concentration.  RESULTS--Men who suffered coronary heart disease had significantly higher serum lipoprotein (a) concentrations than controls (mean difference 105 mg/l; 95% confidence interval 18 to 192 mg/l).  Men with the highest fifth of serum lipoprotein (a) concentrations (cut off point 365 mg/l) suffered a coronary heart disease rate which was more than twice that of men with the lowest four fifths of concentrations.  Logistic regression analysis showed the serum lipoprotein (a) concentration to be significantly associated with coronary heart disease independently of other risk factors.  CONCLUSION--The serum lipoprotein (a) concentration in middle aged men is an independent risk factor for subsequent myocardial infarction or death from coronary heart disease.
Primary defect in alpha-adrenergic responsiveness in patients with varicose veins.  Responsiveness of superficial hand veins to local infusions of noradrenaline was compared in patients with primary varicose veins and in healthy volunteers by use of the dorsal hand vein technique.  Patients with varicose veins required significantly higher doses of noradrenaline for half-maximal venoconstriction than the dose required by control subjects (geometric mean, 11.6 ng/min in patients compared with 4.8 ng/min in control subjects; p = 0.006).  Noradrenaline responsiveness in varicose veins was not significantly different from hand vein responsiveness in the same patients.  Our findings indicate a constitutional decrease in venous alpha-adrenergic receptor responsiveness in patients with varicosities.  Dilation of varicose veins does not further affect noradrenaline-induced venoconstriction.
Calcium entry blockade and adrenergic vascular reactivity in hypertensives: differences between nicardipine and diltiazem.  The interference of nicardipine and diltiazem infused into the brachial artery at systemically ineffective rates, with the forearm vascular response to graded exogenous norepinephrine, was evaluated in hypertensive patients.  Nicardipine (1 and 3 micrograms/dl forearm tissue/min in both absence and presence of propranolol) increased forearm blood flow (venous plethysmography) and antagonized dose dependently the vasoconstrictor effect of norepinephrine, suggesting that functional alpha-antagonism may participate in the vasodilating and possibly the antihypertensive effect of the drug.  On the contrary, no antagonism but rather potentiation of the responses to norepinephrine occurred after diltiazem (0.5 and 1 microgram/dl forearm tissue/min).  Because intra-arterial propranolol abolished that potentiating action of the drug, whereas the local vasodilation to isoproterenol was clearly reduced, diltiazem probably interfered with beta-adrenergic receptor-mediated vasorelaxing mechanisms in human forearm arterioles.  The data further stress the heterogeneity of calcium entry blockers in humans.
Skeletal muscle metabolism in heart failure: a 31P nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy study of leg muscle.  1.  The gastrocnemius muscle of seven patients with mild to moderate chronic heart failure and of five healthy control subjects was studied using 31P nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.  Spectra were collected at rest and during an incremental, symptom-limited, exercise protocol.  Blood flow was measured in the same study during brief interruptions to exercise.  2.  The phosphocreatine/(phosphocreatine plus inorganic phosphate) ratio was lower in patients with heart failure than in control subjects at an exercise rate of 1.5 W, although intracellular pH and blood flow were similar.  3.  The cytosolic free adenosine 5'-diphosphate concentration was markedly increased in patients with heart failure exercising at 1.5 W compared with control subjects exercising at the same workload.  4.  Although the maximum workload achieved by patients with heart failure was less than half of that reached by control subjects, the pH and the phosphocreatine/(phosphocreatine plus inorganic phosphate) ratio were lower in patients with heart failure at maximal load.  Blood flow was less at maximal exercise in patients with heart failure than in control subjects in keeping with the reduced work load.  5.  The phosphocreatine depletion induced in the gastrocnemius muscle by exercise was more severe than previously described in the forearm of patients with heart failure.  6.  Metabolic abnormalities in skeletal muscle may contribute to exercise intolerance in heart failure, particularly during submaximal exercise.
Dynamic association between artery shear flow condition and platelet cytosolic free Ca2+ concentration in human hypertension.  1.  Blood cells and vascular endothelial cells are subjected to a wide range of haemodynamically generated shear stress forces.  In vitro, membrane stretching or shear stress have been observed to activate ion channels and cell metabolism and to facilitate erythrocyte and platelet aggregation.  2.  The present study was designed to evaluate the participation of shear stresses in the control of apparent platelet cytosolic free Ca2+ concentration in hypertensive patients.  3.  Shear conditions and platelet cytosolic free Ca2+ concentration in vitro were studied after a dynamic perturbation induced by 3 months of double-blind treatment with one of two beta-antagonists, carteolol and atenolol.  Brachial artery wall shear rate and stress were estimated by means of a pulsed Doppler velocimeter, and blood viscosity was measured by a co-axial viscometer at a shear rate of 96 s-1.  Platelet cytosolic free Ca2+ concentration was simultaneously measured by using the Quin-2 fluorescent chelator.  The direct effect of atenolol and carteolol on platelet cytosolic free Ca2+ concentration in vitro was also measured after addition of the beta-blockers to platelet-rich plasma.  4.  Atenolol and carteolol decreased blood pressure similarly but their effects on shear rate (P less than 0.02), shear stress (P less than 0.01) and platelet cytosolic free Ca2+ concentration (P less than 0.05) differed after 3 months of therapy.  In contrast, neither of the drugs significantly altered platelet cytosolic free Ca2+ concentration, in vitro per se.  5.  In the overall population, strong positive correlations existed not only between changes in platelet cytosolic free Ca2+ concentration and those in shear rate (r = 0.81, P less than 0.001) and shear stress (r = 0.83, P less than 0.001), but also between their absolute values, suggesting a possible haemodynamic shear-dependent modulation of transmembrane Ca2+ transport.
Myocardial infarction prognostic scoring system.  A myocardial infarction prognostic scoring system for patients treated in a coronary care unit is described.  The prognostic significance of 22 variables, all which were available on admission, were analyzed.  A prognostic index was then constructed by a modified stepwise logistic regressional analysis technique.  The variables that were used in the scoring system were Killip hemodynamic class, infarct location, and the maximal ST segment elevation in a single lead.  The scoring system was validated in an independent group of patients, including a group of patients treated with intravenous streptokinase.  The scoring system may prove to be useful for individual patient prognostication and management strategies, and for the quantification of infarct severity for use in clinical studies.
Wellness motivation in cardiac rehabilitation.  Lack of patient adherence to prescribed regimens is a fundamental problem in cardiac rehabilitation programs.  A causative factor in lack of patient adherence may be related to failure to address differences in individual health behavior motivation in cardiac rehabilitation.  A group of 52 patients who had had myocardial infarction were sampled to test the relationship between social support systems, health locus of control, health value orientations, and wellness motivation.  Pearson correlation coefficients indicated significant positive correlations between health locus of control variables, health value orientation variations, and wellness motivation.  Health locus of control and health value orientation variables entered into a multiple regression equation to explain 32% of the variation in wellness motivation.  Awareness of individual motivational responses that influence health behaviors in cardiac rehabilitation may enable nurses to develop intervention strategies for patients with cardiovascular disease who would benefit from modifying their risk-producing life-styles.
Is phase 2 cardiac rehabilitation necessary for early recovery of patients with cardiac disease? A randomized, controlled study.  In this study the effects of rehabilitation teaching plus exercise testing on perceived self-efficacy for and performance of daily activities were compared with and without exercise training.  Subjects were patients who had had myocardial infarction or cardiac surgery (mean age 57.7 +/- 11.3 years) and who had already received inpatient rehabilitation services.  Subjects were randomly assigned to one of three groups.  Treatment group 1 (n = 11) received teaching, treadmill exercise testing, and exercise training (three times weekly for 5 weeks).  Treatment group 2 (n = 15) received only teaching and exercise testing.  The control group (n = 14) received only routine care without supervised exercise or teaching.  Measurements of self-efficacy and activity performance were made at hospital discharge and at 4 and 9 weeks after the cardiac event.  Repeated-measures analysis of variance showed an increase in self-efficacy scores (p less than 0.001) and performance of physical activity (p less than 0.001) for all groups.  Both treatment groups, especially the training group, obtained the highest scores, but differences between groups were nonsignificant (p greater than 0.05).  These results indicate that in a sample of uncomplicated, motivated patients who had participated in a phase 1 inpatient rehabilitation program, substantial improvements in self-efficacy and performance of daily activities were made early in recovery, before the onset of phase 2, formalized outpatient therapy.
Myocardial infarction in the young adult.  CAD in young male adults below the age of 40 years has generally been found to be associated with the usual risk factors associated with CAD.  In a lesser number of young adults, MIs may be related to cocaine use.  Sympathomimetic effects and increase in myocardial oxygen demand are factors considered responsible for acute MI in cocaine-abusing patients.  In young adults who are asymptomatic following an acute MI and who are able to pass treadmill exercise stress tests at levels of Bruce stage 4 have been shown to have normal coronary arteriograms.  Thus this subset should not require routine coronary angiograms following an acute MI.
Proton magnetic resonance of exercise-induced water changes in gastrocnemius muscle.  Exercise-induced water concentration changes have been determined in the medial gastrocnemius muscle noninvasively with image-guided in vivo proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS).  These measurements were performed on seven normal male volunteers during and after isometric and ischemic-isometric exercise at 5, 10, and 20% maximum voluntary contraction (MVC).  The observed water flux changes during different phases of exercise have been interpreted in terms of fluid transfer between the vasculature and exercising muscle.  Good correlation between individual MVC and changes in water fluxes and the decay of water content was observed after 20% MVC exercise level.  MRS results have been found to be consistent with those reported in the literature based on invasive biopsy techniques.
The effects of etomidate on cerebral metabolism and blood flow in a canine model for hypoperfusion.  The effects of etomidate, a nonbarbiturate cerebral metabolic depressant, on cerebral metabolism and blood flow were studied in 29 dogs during cerebral hypoperfusion.  Three groups of animals were studied during a 45-minute normotensive and a 30-minute hypotensive period: 10 control animals without etomidate, 11 animals receiving a 0.1-mg/kg etomidate bolus followed by an infusion of 0.05 mg/kg/min etomidate (low-dose group), and eight animals receiving doses of etomidate sufficient to suppress electroencephalographic bursts (high-dose group).  The mean arterial pressure fell to similar levels (p less than 0.05) during hypotension in all three groups (40 +/- 5, 38 +/- 3, and 27 +/- 6 mm Hg, respectively).  The mean cerebral oxygen extraction fraction rose (p less than 0.05) from 0.23 +/- 0.02 to 0.55 +/- 0.08 in the five control animals tested and from 0.33 +/- 0.02 to 0.53 +/- 0.02 in the seven animals tested in the low-dose group, but did not increase (p greater than 0.05) in the four animals tested in the high-dose group (0.24 +/- 0.03 to 0.23 +/- 0.05).  Mean cerebral blood flow levels decreased in all groups during hypotension (p less than 0.05): 42 +/- 3 to 21 +/- 4 ml/100 gm/min (52% +/- 12% decrease) in the five animals tested in the control group, 60 +/- 8 to 24 +/- 6 ml/100 gm/min (56% +/- 13% decrease) in the four animals tested in the low-dose group, and 55 +/- 8 to 22 +/- 3 ml/100 gm/min (60% +/- 4% decrease) in the four animals tested in the high-dose group.  In summary, the cerebral oxygen extraction fraction increased in the control animals and low-dose recipients during hypotension, suggesting the presence of threatened cerebral tissue.  In contrast, the cerebral oxygen extraction did not change during hypotension when high-dose etomidate was administered.  It is concluded that high-dose etomidate may preserve the cerebral metabolic state during hypotension in the present model.
Myocardial metabolism of fluorodeoxyglucose compared to cell membrane integrity for the potassium analogue rubidium-82 for assessing infarct size in man by PET   Potassium loss from damaged myocardial cells is linearly related to CPK enzyme loss reflecting extent of necrosis.  The potassium analog, rubidium-82 (82Rb), is extracted after i.v.  injection and retained in viable myocardium but is not trapped or washed out of necrotic regions.  To compare myocardial cell metabolism with membrane dysfunction as indicators of necrosis/viability, 43 patients with evolving myocardial infarction and coronary arteriography had positron emission tomography using fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and the potassium analog 82Rb.  Percent of heart showing FDG defects and 82Rb washout on sequential images indicating failure to retain the potassium analogue were visually assessed and quantified by automated software.  Infarct size based on rubidium kinetics correlated closely with size and location on FDG images (visual r = 0.93, automated r = 0.82), suggesting that loss of cell membrane integrity for trapping the potassium analog 82Rb parallels loss of intracellular glucose metabolism, both comparable quantitative markers of myocardial necrosis/viability.
Clinical validation of a miniature nuclear probe system for continuous on-line monitoring of cardiac function and ST-segment   A new, miniature cesium iodide/photodiode nuclear probe (the "Cardioscint") has been developed for continuous on-line measurement of left ventricular function and the ST-segment.  Ejection fraction (EF) measurements in 77 patients were compared with gated equilibrium radionuclide ventriculograms.  The probe was positioned over the left ventricle by first using a blind positioning algorithm and then by using the gamma camera.  Background was measured both manually and automatically.  There was good correlation between probe (positioned blind) and gamma camera EF with both manual (r = 0.80, n = 65) and automatic (r = 0.78, n = 66) backgrounds.  Use of the gamma camera did not significantly alter the results.  Correlation between the probe stroke counts and thermodilution-derived stroke index during atrial pacing in six subjects was also satisfactory (r = 0.69, n = 102).  Thus, the Cardioscint is able to provide a reliable estimate of EF and can track rapid changes in cardiac volumes.
UK-68,798: a novel, potent and highly selective class III antiarrhythmic agent which blocks potassium channels in cardiac cells.  UK-68,798 increased the duration and effective refractory period of cardiac action potentials recorded in vitro from canine ventricular muscle and Purkinje fibers in a concentration dependent manner from 5 nM to 1 microM.  The resting membrane potential, amplitude and maximum upstroke velocity of action potentials were unaffected by UK-68,798, indicating the selective class III antiarrhythmic properties of this agent.  UK-68,798 (5 nM-1 microM) increased the effective refractory period of isolated guinea pig papillary muscles at stimulation frequencies of 1 Hz and 5 Hz without influencing the conduction velocity, further confirming that UK-68,798 is devoid of class I antiarrhythmic activity including block of the sodium channel.  Studies using single voltage clamped guinea pig ventricular myocytes indicated that UK-68,798 at concentrations of 50 nM and 2 microM blocks a time-dependent K+ current, with no appreciable effects on the time-independent K+ current or the inward calcium current.  UK-68,798 is therefore a highly selective K+ channel blocking agent with class III antiarrhythmic properties, a profile that holds considerable promise for the therapy of life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias.
Characterization of LY233569 on 5-lipoxygenase and reperfusion injury of ischemic myocardium.  LY233569 produced concentration-dependent inhibition of isolated guinea pig 5-lipoxygenase (5-LPO) and 5-LPO activity of human polymorphonuclear leukocytes in vitro; IC50 values were 0.4 and 0.1 microM, respectively.  LY233569 also inhibited (IC50 approximately 1.8 microM) zymosan-stimulated production of leukotriene B4 in canine whole blood but had little or no concomitant effect on the production of thromboxane B2.  Concentrations of LY233569 as high as 10 microM did not inhibit production or scavenge superoxide from activated human neutrophils.  In normal anesthetized dogs, infusion of LY233569 (0.11 mg/kg/min, i.v.) for 6 hr produced persistent inhibition (approximately 80%) of leukotriene B4 production in blood challenged ex vivo with zymosan; the plasma concentration (approximately 4 microM) of LY233569 was consistent with in vitro data illustrating selective and maximal inhibition of 5-LPO.  In subsequent experiments, myocardial infarct size was measured after 1 hr of occlusion of the circumflex coronary artery and 5 hr of reperfusion.  Continuous infusion of LY233569 (0.11 mg/kg/min, i.v.) had little or no effect on base-line systolic arterial pressure, cardiac rate and the pressure rate product when compared with time-related changes observed in control dogs.  LY233569 infusion also did not alter the degree of ST-segment deviation or the intensity and duration of cardiac arrhythmias associated with coronary artery occlusion and reperfusion.  Resultant myocardial infarct sizes were 45 +/- 5% of the left ventricle placed at risk in control dogs and 43 +/- 4% in dogs given LY233569.  Myeloperoxidase activity of infarcted myocardium did not differ between groups.
Interaction of citrus juices with felodipine and nifedipine   Six men with borderline hypertension took felodipine 5 mg with water, grapefruit juice, or orange juice.  The mean felodipine bioavailability with grapefruit juice was 284 (range 164-469)% of that with water.  The dehydrofelodipine/felodipine AUC ratio was lower, diastolic blood pressure lower, and heart rate higher with grapefruit juice than with water.  Vasodilatation-related side-effects were more frequent.  Orange juice had no such effects.  Six healthy men took nifedipine 10 mg with water or grapefruit juice; the bioavailability with grapefruit juice was 134 (108-169)% of that with water.
The effect of lateral tilt on maternal and fetal hemodynamic variables.  We measured maternal blood pressure and heart rate, fetal heart rate, and umbilical artery velocity waveforms in 25 healthy women placed in the supine and in both right and left 5 degrees and 10 degrees lateral tilt positions.  Although we found no significant difference among these variables in the various maternal positions, two of 25 women became hypotensive and symptomatic in the supine and 5 degrees tilt positions.  Because we could not predict which women would become symptomatic, we recommend lateral tilt of all pregnant women during operative procedures beyond 20 weeks' gestation, including those in the lithotomy position for vaginal delivery.
Fluosol: an oxygen-delivery fluid for use in percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty.  Fluosol (20% intravascular perfluorochemical emulsion) is an oxygen-carrying emulsion used to deliver oxygen to ischemic myocardium during percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA).  Fluosol is composed of two perfluorochemicals, perfluorodecalin and perfluorotripropylamine.  It has a high capacity for oxygen solubility, a low viscosity, and a small particle size.  Following administration, the perfluorochemicals in fluosol are not metabolized.  Rather, most are expired as gaseous particles through the lungs; the remainder are taken up by the organs of the reticuloendothelial system and later expired.  When administered during balloon inflation in PTCA, fluosol preserves ventricular wall motion and global left ventricular ejection fraction.  In addition, it minimizes ST segment changes and preserves cardiac output.  Fluosol may be especially useful in patients who have poor contractile reserve, multivessel disease, or serious underlying illness.  Other uses under investigation include limitation of myocardial infarct size and chemosensitization or radiosensitization of malignant tumors.  Adverse effects secondary to the use of fluosol include ventricular arrhythmias, pruritus, bradycardia, chest pain, dyspnea, and increased respiratory rate.  Fluosol must be thawed, admixed, warmed to body temperature, and oxygenated prior to intracoronary administration.  The usual administration rate is 60 mL/min during each balloon inflation.
Improving compliance and increasing control of hypertension: needs of special hypertensive populations.  Approximately 60 million people in the United States have hypertension.  More than half are either untreated or treated without blood pressure control, despite the well-known risks of hypertension and the established benefits of treatment.  The major reason for inadequate control of hypertension is poor adherence to treatment.  Approximately 50% of patients with hypertension fail to keep follow-up appointments, and only 60% take their medications as prescribed.  Barriers to effective therapeutic adherence include poor doctor-patient communication, cost of antihypertensive therapy, and side effects of the drugs.  To increase control of hypertension, compliance with therapy must be improved.  Physicians and patients must be mutually committed to achieving control of blood pressure.  Physicians should communicate instructions clearly and prescribe therapies that are effective, affordable, and have minimal or no adverse effects on patient quality of life or overall cardiac risk profile.  The needs of special hypertensive populations (i.e., elderly, black, and young patients) must also be recognized and addressed.  Patients must follow recommendations and alert their physicians to any problems with their medications--particularly those relating to side effects and cost.  When selecting drug therapy it should be noted that older patients are sensitive to volume depletion and sympathetic inhibition.  In this group of patients, initial drug doses should be low and increments smaller and more gradual than in younger patients.  Black patients with hypertension show an accentuated response to diuretics and blunted responses to beta-blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors as monotherapy.  However, when used with a diuretic, there are no racial differences in the blood pressure lowering effects of beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors.
Preclinical pharmacology of celiprolol: a cardioselective beta-adrenergic antagonist and mild vasodilator.  Celiprolol is a new antihypertensive agent that represents a new generation of beta-blockers.  It combines cardioselective beta-adrenergic antagonism (beta 1) with a mild vasodilation via vasoselective beta-adrenergic agonism (beta 2).  Results of animal studies show that celiprolol has beta 1-antagonist potency similar to that of propranolol and atenolol, and cardioselectivity slightly greater than that of atenolol.  Celiprolol does not produce bronchoconstriction but has mild propranolol-resistant bronchodilatory properties in cats.  The compound also relaxes vascular smooth muscle in a propranolol-sensitive fashion, suggesting a mechanism of beta 2-agonism.  The beta 2-agonism results in a selective downregulation in beta 2-receptor number and response in tissue culture, as well as in peripheral tissue from celiprolol-treated volunteers.  The decreases in beta 2-receptors are blocked by concomitant treatment with propranolol.  Celiprolol is devoid of cardiac depressant activity and in fact has mild cardiostimulatory actions.  The cardiostimulation is not via beta 1-stimulation, since it is not abolished by beta-blocking doses of propranolol.  In a model of severe myocardial ischemia, celiprolol attenuates the ischemia-induced myocardial acidosis and improves the regional segment function.  These results are suggestive of myocardial protection.  In summary, celiprolol distinguishes itself from other beta-blockers by virtue of its cardioselectivity, vasorelaxation via beta 2-agonism, and the lack of bronchoconstriction and cardiodepression.  These properties observed in animal studies have also been documented in clinical trials.
Clinical safety and efficacy of celiprolol.  The management of essential hypertension requires therapeutic selections that are not only effective in reducing diastolic blood pressure but are also tailored to the individual patient, with minimal effect on patient demographics, concurrent illnesses, and cardiovascular risk factors.  Celiprolol hydrochloride is a new highly cardioselective vasodilating beta-adrenoceptor antagonist that has been proven effective and safe for the treatment of essential hypertension.  It is comparable to other therapies in blood pressure control while demonstrating an excellent safety profile, favorable hemodynamic activity, and minimal effects on other cardiovascular risk factors.  Celiprolol may offer the physician a unique therapeutic alternative.
Metabolic considerations in the choice of therapy for the patient with hypertension.  The objective of treating patients with hypertension is not simply to reduce blood pressure but rather to prevent the associated morbidity and mortality.  Recent assessments of clinical trials have shown that while the risk of stroke is consistently lower with antihypertensive therapy, the same degree of success has not been demonstrated for coronary artery disease (CAD).  Although there are many explanations of why we have not done as well in preventing CAD, one possibility is that the therapy used in clinical trials, primarily thiazide diuretics and beta-adrenoreceptor blockers, has increased the patient's risk of developing coronary atherosclerosis or lethal arrhythmias.  Four classes of antihypertensive agents are recommended for initial therapy--thiazide diuretics, beta-adrenoreceptor blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, and calcium entry blockers.  The metabolic effects of thiazide diuretics include electrolyte disturbances (hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, and hyponatremia), dyslipidemia (increased triglycerides), abnormalities of glucose metabolism (hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, and peripheral insulin resistance), and hyperuricemia.  beta-Adrenoreceptor blockers have many of the same metabolic adverse reactions.  beta-Adrenoreceptor blockers without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA) also cause dyslipidemias (lowered high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and increased triglycerides) and abnormalities of glucose metabolism (hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, and peripheral insulin resistance).  beta-Adrenoreceptor blockers with ISA and third-generation beta-blockers with selective partial agonist activity (celiprolol and dilevalol) do not cause dyslipidemia and to date do not appear to induce abnormalities in glucose metabolism.  ACE inhibitors may decrease triglycerides and increase high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and captopril may improve insulin sensitivity.  Calcium entry blockers are metabolically neutral.
Correlation of isomeric fatty acids in human adipose tissue with clinical risk factors for cardiovascular disease.  The relationships between the adipose tissue concentrations of 19 geometric and positional fatty acid isomers and 10 cardiovascular disease risk factors were determined in 76 free-living adult males.  The percentages for trans isomers (total mean +/- SD 4.14 +/- 0.97%) and cis isomers (total mean +/- SD 2.91 +/- 0.34%) in adipose tissue generally agreed with dietary estimates based on the consumption of hydrogenated oils.  A major exception was the percentage of 11c-18:1, which was twofold higher in adipose tissue.  The total level of fatty acid isomers in adipose tissue or a factor (derived by factor analysis) that was representative of isomers of dietary origin was not significantly correlated with the cardiovascular risk factors.  Only three trans isomers (11t-18:1, 12t-18:1, and 5t-14:1) and three cis isomers (11c-18:1, 13c-18:1, and 7c-16:1) were weakly correlated either positively or negatively with age, body mass index, plasma and lipoprotein cholesterol, and/or blood pressure (P less than 0.05, r greater than 0.231).
Blood pressure lowering in elderly subjects: a double-blind crossover study of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids.  In 46 elderly (aged greater than or equal to 60 y) hypertensive subjects with entry systolic blood pressure (SBP) greater than or equal to 160 or diastolic blood pressure (DBP) greater than or equal to 90 mm Hg, our specific aim in a randomized, double-blind, crossover study (two 8-wk treatment periods separated by a 3-wk washout) was to compare blood pressure-lowering effects of 9 g fish oil/d [omega-3 (n-3) fatty acid] vs 9 g corn oil/d [omega-6 (n-6) fatty acid].  After a 4-wk baseline period, 22 subjects were randomly assigned to receive fish oil and 24 to receive corn oil.  For both 8-wk treatments there were no between-group differences in the change in blood pressure.  There was a treatment difference for standing DBP when baseline values were compared with those after treatment 2; DBP decreased by 5.1 mm Hg in the fish-oil group vs 0.72 mm Hg in the corn-oil group (P = 0.024).  Within groups during the first treatment, both fish oil and corn oil lowered all four blood pressure measures (P less than 0.05); blood pressures were not further lowered during the second treatment compared with the washout period.  There were no significant between-group differences in laboratory safety tests or categorical side effects.  Fish oil lowered triglycerides by 0.47 mmol/L (P less than 0.001).  In elderly subjects, diet plus both omega-3 and omega-6 supplements (9 g/d) safely and effectively lower SBP and DBP.
When do cerebral emboli appear during open heart operations? A transcranial Doppler study.  The transcranial Doppler technique enabled the detection of cerebral air emboli in 10 of 10 patients during open-heart valve operations despite standard deairing procedures.  With this technique, the occurrence of emboli in the right middle cerebral artery was followed continuously in patients undergoing aortic or mitral valve replacement.  Membrane oxygenators were used.  Scattered emboli were observed during the insertion of the aortic cannula, at the start of cardiopulmonary bypass, and after the declamping of the aorta with the heart beating while empty.  During the period of aortic cross-clamping, no emboli were detected.  Despite careful deairing procedures, the recordings indicated a large amount of emboli during filling of the empty beating heart in all 10 patients.  Thus, this study indicates that cerebral emboli in open heart procedures are most likely to occur during the redistribution of blood from the heart-lung machine to the patient when the heart is beginning to eject actively, despite careful standard deairing procedures.  Meticulous deairing before declamping the aorta is strongly advocated.  In addition, a short period of filling of the beating heart before final closure of the aortic incision or vent may decrease the incidence of cerebral emboli.  A concomitant reduction in cerebral blood flow by hyperventilation or anesthetics or both during filling of the empty beating heart may also be beneficial.
Retrograde continuous warm blood cardioplegia: a new concept in myocardial protection   This report presents the results in our first clinical series of patients receiving continuous warm blood cardioplegia through the coronary sinus.  Warm oxygenated blood cardioplegia has certain theoretical advantages, such as continuously supplying oxygen and substrates to the arrested heart while avoiding the side effects of hypothermia.  Retrograde infusion of cardioplegia also offers certain advantages (eg, in valve operations and in patients with severe coronary artery disease) that are complementary to warm blood cardioplegia.  Retrograde warm blood cardioplegia was used in 113 consecutive patients (85 men and 28 women with a mean age of 61 years) undergoing various procedures.  Three percent of the patients died, 7% needed transient intraaortic balloon pump support, 6% had evidence of perioperative myocardial infarction, and 96% had spontaneous return of rhythm.  There were no coronary sinus injuries.  This new technique of retrograde continuous warm blood cardioplegia is a simple, safe, and reliable method of myocardial protection that may change the way we currently protect the heart intraoperatively.
Dopamine and high-dose insulin infusion (glucose-insulin-potassium) after a cardiac operation: effects on myocardial metabolism.  Myocardial insulin resistance, in association with surgical stress, restricts the availability of carbohydrates and increases the load of free fatty acids (FFAs) on the heart.  On theoretical grounds adrenergic drugs may be expected to aggravate this situation, whereas the opposite is expected from insulin.  The influence of dopamine and a combination of dopamine (7 micrograms/kg body weight/min) and high-dose insulin (7 IU/kg) on myocardial energy metabolism was studied in 19 patients 4 to 6 hours after a coronary operation.  Infusion of dopamine (7 micrograms/kg body weight/min) induced metabolic changes that may be unfavorable to the strained myocardium.  There was an increase of the myocardial FFA load and a rise in myocardial oxygen expenditure by 60% to 70%.  There changes were, however, not matched by an increase in myocardial substrate uptake.  "Oxygen wastage" of FFA metabolism at high circulating catecholamine levels is suggested.  There were also signs suggesting an amplified systemic trauma response: systemic oxygen consumption increased by 15%, and an increase in the arterial levels of FFAs, glucose, and ketones was observed.  Divergent metabolic effects of dopamine and insulin were demonstrated.  The most prominent metabolic effects of adding high-dose insulin to dopamine were a marked reduction of arterial FFA levels and a shift toward myocardial carbohydrate utilization at the expense of FFAs.  Myocardial uptake of FFAs ceased.  Myocardial insulin resistance may thus to a significant extent be overcome by supraphysiological doses of insulin, even during infusion of adrenergic drugs.
Transesophageal echocardiography in acute aortic transection.  Confirming the diagnosis of acute transection of the descending aorta can be problematic.  Unnecessary patient movement and time delay are often associated with conventional investigations.  We describe a patient in whom such an injury was clearly and quickly defined at the bedside by transesophageal echocardiography.
Apical aortic cannulation: application of an old method with new paraphernalia.  An instrument assembly consisting of a special aortic cross-clamp and double-lumen perfusion cannula is presented.  The application of these instruments allows occlusion of the ascending aorta traversed by the perfusion cannula inserted directly or through the apex of the heart as well as simultaneous left ventricular venting.
Popliteal aneurysms identified by intra-arterial streptokinase: a changing pattern of presentation.  Five patients presenting with chronic or subacute leg ischaemia due to thrombosed popliteal artery aneurysm are described.  Only one of these aneurysms was diagnosed before intra-arterial streptokinase infusion, which successfully lysed the thrombus in all cases.  One aneurysm had been symptomatic for 5 years and another for 2 years.  Popliteal aneurysm may well be underdiagnosed as a cause of chronic leg ischaemia.
Influence of low osmolality contrast media on electrophysiology and hemodynamics in coronary angiography: differences between an ionic (ioxaglate) and a nonionic (iohexol) agent.  It has recently been suggested that the addition of sodium to low osmolality contrast media may reduce the incidence of ventricular fibrillation and conduction disturbances during coronary angiography.  In a randomized, double blind study of 30 patients undergoing coronary angiography we therefore examined the electrophysiological and hemodynamic effects of the two low osmolality contrast media-ioxaglate (with sodium) and iohexol (without sodium).  Standard ECG, aortic blood pressure, and His bundle electrocardiogram were recorded.  The contrast media were well tolerated and no serious arrhythmias were observed.  Both induced a transient decrement in systolic blood pressure and reduction in heart rate 10 s following contrast injection (all P less than 0.01).  Ioxaglate prolonged the QT interval at 10 s (P less than 0.01) and also when analysed for the whole observation period (120 s) (P less than 0.05), whereas iohexol did not cause any significant changes in the QT-interval.  The AH-interval was prolonged by ioxaglate at 10 s (P less than 0.01), but not altered by iohexol.  Thus, other factors than osmolality and sodium content might contribute to QT prolongation, since only the contrast agents with sodium (ioxaglate) induced QT prolongation in this study.
Precertification for percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty in Medicare beneficiaries: a melting pot or a need for better national standards?  The Health Care Financing Administration has contracted with state peer review organizations (PROs) in its effort to assure the quality of services and eliminate unreasonable and inappropriate care provided Medicare beneficiaries.  By law, each state PRO must select 10 procedures for precertification.  Coronary angioplasty has been chosen by 45 PROs for precertification and criteria in each state were developed with the advice of local physicians.  This report describes the findings of a survey of these precertification criteria in an effort to determine their variability and to compare the PRO criteria to published national criteria created by expert panels.  Current precertification criteria of Medicare beneficiaries show significant variability in the priorities and the clinical practice of cardiologists in performing coronary angioplasty, despite established and published guidelines for its safe and efficacious use.  It is likely that the establishment of locally based criteria for coronary angioplasty will be geographically uneven and probably have a less than expected impact on the care provided to Medicare beneficiaries.
Rib compression of the coronary arteries.  This report describes the finding of coronary artery narrowing caused by compression by an overlying rib in two patients with cardiomegaly.  There is probably no clinical significance to this finding.  The primary differential diagnostic entity is myocardial bridging.
Coronary stent implantation in acute vessel closure 48 hours after an unsatisfactory coronary angioplasty.  We report the implantation of a balloon-expandable stent in a patient with acute vessel closure in the state of evolving myocardial infarction following 48 hr after unsatisfactory coronary angioplasty.  The stent was implanted after successful recanalization of an occluded left anterior descending artery, with repeated unsatisfactory results of balloon angioplasty.  Adjunct thrombolytic therapy was contraindicated.  No residual stenosis was documented in immediate control angiograms, or after 24 hr, 3 weeks, and 4 months.
Implantation of an endoluminal prosthesis at the distal anastomosis of a bypass graft for abrupt closure following balloon angioplasty.  A coronary Wallstent was implanted in a 10-year-old saphenous vein bypass graft following a PTCA that was complicated by abrupt closure.  Anterograde flow was restored and no myocardial necrosis resulted.  One week later, bypass surgery was performed due to a bleeding complication associated with the anticoagulation regimen.
Alfentanil pharmacokinetics in patients undergoing abdominal aortic surgery.  The pharmacokinetics of alfentanil, 300 micrograms.kg-1 IV, were determined in patients undergoing elective abdominal aortic reconstruction.  The mean age (+/- SD) of the patients was 64.3 +/- 7.4 yr; their mean weight was 74.7 +/- 13.8 kg.  Five patients underwent aneurysm repair and six had aortobifemoral grafting.  Serum alfentanil concentrations were measured by gas-liquid chromatography in samples drawn at increasing intervals over a 24-hr period.  A three-compartment model was fitted to the concentration versus time data.  The volume of the central compartment and the volume of distribution at steady state (Vdss) were 0.44 +/- 0.022 and 0.63 +/- 0.32 L.kg-1, respectively.  Total drug clearance was 6.4 = 1.9 ml.min-1.kg-1.  The elimination half-time was 3.7 +/- 2.6 hr.  Patient age was positively correlated with both Vdss and elimination half-time.  There were no significant correlations between the pharmacokinetic variables and the duration of aortic cross-clamping, the duration of surgery, or the rate or total volume of IV fluids infused intraoperatively.  In general surgical patients, the elimination half-time of alfentanil has been reported to be 1.2-2.0 hr.  Although the elimination half-time of alfentanil was longer in patients undergoing abdominal aortic surgery, alfentanil was eliminated much faster than either fentanyl or sufentanil in this patient population.
Transoesophageal echocardiogram may fail to diagnose perioperative myocardial infarction.  We report a case in which a 55-yr-old man undergoing aortocoronary bypass was monitored with electrocardiogram and transoesophageal echocardiogram.  Intraoperative electrocardiogram and simultaneous ECG recordings using the Holter monitor showed an ST elevation of greater than 2 mm and new Q wave formation in leads AVF and V5 during skin closure.  However, the transoesophageal echocardiogram showed no wall motion abnormalities.  No significant haemodynamic abnormalities were observed during the period of intraoperative ECG changes.  He was treated with nitroglycerin infusion.  Confirmation of a perioperative myocardial infarct was documented by postoperative 12-lead ECG and CPK-MB.  A post-operative transthoracic echocardiogram showed a hypokinetic left ventricle with an anteroapical infarct.  Thus transoesophageal echocardiography failed to detect an apical wall motion abnormality when the probe was placed at the midpapillary level.  This limitation can be overcome by periodically obtaining apical views or by using probes with more than one imaging plane.
Cardioprotective effects of authentic nitric oxide in myocardial ischemia with reperfusion.  BACKGROUND AND METHODS: The purpose of this study was to determine the effects of nitric oxide (NO), believed to be endothelium-derived relaxing factor on reperfusion injury after myocardial ischemia (MI).  The effects of NO were investigated in a 6-hr model of MI with reperfusion in open-chest, anesthetized cats.  A solution containing NO was infused iv starting 30 min after occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary artery, continuing through reperfusion 1 hr later, and lasting for 5.5 hr.  Estimated NO concentration in the circulation was 1 to 2 x 10(-9) M.  RESULTS: The areas-at-risk expressed as a percentage of the total left ventricular weights were not significantly different among either of the MI groups.  However, the necrotic area (expressed as a percentage of the myocardial area-at-risk) was significantly (p less than .01) lower in the NO-treated MI cats compared with the MI + vehicle group.  Cardiac myeloperoxidase activities indicated that significantly (p less than .05) fewer neutrophils were attracted to the necrotic zone of the NO-treated MI cats when compared with MI cats receiving only the vehicle.  Sodium nitrate (NaNO2) (pH 7.4), a major breakdown product of NO, failed to exert any protective effect in this same model of MI and reperfusion.  CONCLUSIONS: NO appears to provide significant myocardial protection after ischemia and reperfusion.  NO may afford cardioprotection by incorporation into circulating blood cells (i.e., neutrophils, platelets), thereby inhibiting their accumulation and adherence in the ischemic region, or by a direct cardiac cytoprotective effect.  Further studies using NO donors rather than NO would be an appropriate clinically relevant mode of treatment in MI.
Pulmonary function and cardiovascular risk factor relationships in black and in white young men and women. The CARDIA Study   Pulmonary function is known to be related inversely to incidence of coronary heart disease, congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive lung disease, lung cancer, and death from all causes.  Reasons for some of these associations are poorly understood.  Relationships between cardiovascular disease risk factors and pulmonary function were examined in 5,115 18- to 30-year-old black and white male and female participants in the study of Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA).  Forced expiratory volume in 1 s adjusted for height (FEV1/Ht2) was significantly lower in smokers than nonsmokers and in persons who reported shortness of breath; FEV1/Ht2 was correlated positively with a history of strenuous physical activity, duration of exercise on the treadmill, and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol.  It was associated negatively with skinfold thicknesses, serum triglycerides, fasting serum insulin, and the Cook Medley scale of hostility.  The association between pulmonary function and heart disease risk may reflect associations with physical fitness, vigor, fatness, and lipid profiles, as well as with cigarette smoking.
Ischemia and reperfusion during intermittent coronary occlusion in man. Studies of electrocardiographic changes and CPK release.  The course of 357 balloon inflations performed during 38 angioplasties for single-vessel coronary artery disease was prospectively studied using continuous ECG recording.  Ischemic ECG changes appeared during 91 percent of the inflations at a mean of 20 +/- 8 seconds after inflation and resolved in 97 percent of those at a mean of 11 +/- 5 seconds after deflation.  Elevation of the plasma CPK level was found in six patients who had ischemic ECG changes for at least 7.8 minutes.  The duration of ischemia did not exceed 5.4 minutes in any of the patients without CPK elevation.  Resolution of the ischemic changes was delayed in patients with CPK elevation and in last vs initial inflations.  We conclude that in patients with noninfarcted myocardium, ECG changes follow coronary occlusion and reflow very rapidly, detecting these coronary events with a high sensitivity.  Lack of rapid regression predicts lack of reperfusion, and persistence of ischemia for more than 7.8 minutes is sufficient to cause myocardial necrosis.
Regression of the left main trunk lesion by steroid administration in Takayasu's aortitis.  A 62-year-old man with unstable angina due to severe narrowing of the left main trunk (LMT) was examined.  Emergency bypass surgery was performed with an internal mammary artery graft, instead of a saphenous vein graft, because of the thickened, edematous ascending aorta.  Postoperative coronary angiography showed the lesion of the LMT markedly regressing.  Presumably, this stenotic lesion of the LMT was caused by active aortitis and was partially reversible by steroid administration both during and after surgery.  Steroid therapy can be added to the list of treatments for cases of LMT disease associated with Takayasu's aortitis, if signs of active inflammation are present.
Monitoring the effect of CPAP on left ventricular function using continuous mixed-blood saturation.  The hypothetic benefit of CPAP on cardiac performance and on a reduction in VO2 was tested in a patient before heart transplantation after acute myocardial infarction using continuous SvO2 monitoring.  The CPAP added to inotropic support (enoximone plus dobutamine) and intraaortic balloon pumping dramatically increased SvO2 in relation to both an increase in cardiac output and a decrease in VO2 secondary to respiratory work reduction, validating the initial hypotheses.
Pseudo pre-excitation with concertina effect in idioventricular tachycardia.  The concertina effect is a phenomenon where the QRS complexes reflect alternating phases of gradual widening and narrowing.  This is most commonly due to ventricular pre-excitation, and the changes in QRS morphology are due to variability of the ventricular zone that undergoes pre-excitation.  This presentation reflects a case where the concertina effect is due to an idioventricular tachycardia at a rate nearly identical to the sinus rate.  Variable degrees of ventricular fusion therefore occur, and the concertina effect ensues, in relation to slight variations of the sinus cycle.
Traumatic and spontaneous extracranial internal carotid artery dissections.  Seventy patients with spontaneous and 21 with traumatic extracranial internal carotid artery dissections were studied clinically and angiographically with mean follow-ups of 64 (spontaneous group) and 40 months (traumatic group).  Sixty percent of the patients in the spontaneous group and 71% in the traumatic group also had follow-up angiograms.  In traumatic dissections aneurysms were common, significantly fewer aneurysms resolved or became smaller and fewer stenoses resolved or improved, whereas more stenoses progressed to occlusion.  Traumatic dissections were more likely to leave the patients with neurological deficits.  A significantly higher percentage of the patients with spontaneous dissections were asymptomatic at follow-up compared with the traumatic group.  Although both spontaneous and traumatic dissections of extracranial internal carotid arteries mostly carry a good prognosis, the outcome may be somewhat less favorable for the traumatic group.
Prospective randomized multicenter comparison of in situ and reversed vein infrapopliteal bypasses.  We have performed a prospective, randomized, multicenter study to compare in situ and reversed vein grafts for long limb salvage bypasses from the proximal thigh to an infrapopliteal artery.  Three hundred eighty-four patients required an infrapopliteal bypass for critical lower extremity ischemia.  Of these, 259 were excluded because a short vein bypass was performed or because the vein was considered inadequate.  The remaining 125 patients had a randomized vein bypass, 63 reversed, 62 in situ.  The two groups were similar with regard to risk factors, indications, graft dimensions, and outflow.  Secondary patency at 30 months was similar for both techniques: reversed 67% +/- 9% (+/- SE); in situ 69% +/- 8%.  For veins less than or equal to 3.0 mm in minimum distended diameter 24-month patency rates were 61% +/- 22% for 12 in situ veins and 37% +/- 29% for 10 reversed veins (p greater than 0.05).  Angiographic evaluation of failing grafts revealed lesions similar in type and frequency in both types of grafts.  These included focal (in situ, n = 4; reversed, n = 7) and diffuse vein hyperplasia (in situ, n = 2; reversed, n = 1), and inflow and outflow stenoses (in situ, n = 4; reversed, n = 3).  The incidence of wound complications and the mortality rate were similar for the two groups.  These data show no significant difference in overall patency rates for the two types of vein grafts at 2 1/2 years.
Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm: the Harborview experience.  During the last decade (1980 to 1989) 186 patients with ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm were admitted to a single urban hospital.  Ninety-six percent of these patients had a prehospital systolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg.  Management included paramedic field resuscitation and transport, an emergency department diagnostic protocol completed in an average of 12 minutes, rapid transport to a dedicated emergency operating room, aneurysmorrhaphy by general surgery chief residents under the supervision of specialist vascular surgeons, and skilled postoperative intensive care unit care.  Nevertheless, 130 (70%) patients died in the first 30 postoperative days--3% in the emergency department, 13% in the operating room, 51% in the intensive care unit, and 3% on the ward or at home.  Certain features--age greater than 80 years, female gender, persistent preoperative hypotension despite aggressive crystalloid and blood replacement, admission hematocrit less than 25, transfusion requirements exceeding 15 units--were associated with a greater than 90% likelihood of death.  No patient with preoperative cardiac arrest survived more than 24 hours.  From this experience we conclude that, although "optimal" prehospital, emergency department, operating room, and postoperative care can improve the outcome of patients with ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms in shock, most such patients will die.  Certain clinical features predict such excessive mortality rates after ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms that withholding operation may be reasonable.  Screening of patients at high risk for abdominal aortic aneurysm, followed by elective aneurysmorrhaphy, is clearly indicated.
Probability of rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm after an unrelated operative procedure: a prospective study.  It has been assumed by some authors that patients with abdominal aortic aneurysms may be at increased risk of rupture after unrelated operations.  From July 1986 to December 1989, 33 patients (29 men, 4 women) with a known abdominal aortic aneurysm underwent 45 operations.  Twenty-eight patients had an infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm, and five patients had a thoracoabdominal aneurysm.  The abdominal aortic aneurysm ranged in transverse diameter from 3.0 to 8.5 cm (average 5.6 cm).  Twenty-seven patients underwent a single operation, and six patients had two or more (range of 1 to 6).  Operations performed were abdominal (13); cardiothoracic (9); head/neck (2); other vascular (11); urologic (7); amputation (2); breast (1).  General anesthesia was used in 29 procedures, spinal/epidural in 6, and regional/local in 10.  One postoperative death occurred from cardiopulmonary failure.  One patient died of a ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm at 20 days after coronary artery bypass (1/33 patients [3%]; 1/45 operations [2%]).  Fourteen patients had repair of their abdominal aortic aneurysm at a later date, an average of 18 weeks after operation.  Four patients had abdominal aortic aneurysm considered too small to warrant resection (average 3.6 cm).  Four patients were considered at excessive risk for elective repair.  The five thoracoabdominal aneurysm were not repaired.  Four patients are awaiting repair.  During this same 40-month period, two other patients, not known to have an abdominal aortic aneurysm, died of a ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm after another operative procedure, at 21 days and 77 days.  All three ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms were 5.0 cm or greater in transverse diameter.
The accuracy of CT scanning in the diagnosis of abdominal and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms.  As CT scanning has evolved as a reliable clinical tool, the use of angiography in the diagnosis of aortic aneurysmal disease has diminished.  Fewer than 25% of patients with aortic aneurysmal disease undergo aortic angiographic evaluation at our institution.  A prospective clinical study was undertaken to assess the validity of this policy.  One hundred patients with clinical or ultrasonographic evidence of aortic aneurysms were evaluated prospectively during the period July 1987 to December 1989.  All patients underwent CT scanning as an initial evaluation.  Patients were selected for angiography if they fulfilled any of the following criteria: radiographic evidence of thoracoabdominal or juxtarenal aneurysms, or horseshoe kidney; or clinical suggestion of renal artery stenosis, mesenteric arterial insufficiency, aortoiliac occlusive disease, or lower extremity aneurysmal disease.  During this period 19 patients (19%) underwent both CT scanning and angiography.  The indications for angiography were thoracoabdominal aneurysms (7), juxtarenal aneurysms (2), clinical evidence of mesenteric insufficiency (1) or renal insufficiency (2), evidence of lower extremity aneurysmal disease (3), or severe aortoiliac occlusive disease (4).  Eighty-one patients (81%) underwent CT scanning as the only radiographic evaluation.  No patient was adversely affected by elimination of angiographic evaluation.  CT scanning revealed inflammatory aneurysms (4), retroaortic renal veins (2), and horseshoe kidney (1).  This study suggests that most (81%) patients with aortic aneurysmal disease can be adequately evaluated by CT scanning, and that a very selective policy of angiographic evaluation is indicated.
Lacunar transient ischaemic attacks: a clinically useful concept?  Lacunar ischaemic stroke syndromes are clinically, pathophysiologically, and prognostically distinguishable from cortical ischaemic stroke syndromes.  Could cerebrovascular transient ischaemic attacks (TIAs) share similar heterogeneity? 130 patients with TIAs were prospectively studied, 71 of whom underwent carotid angiography.  Symptoms were associated with a 50% or greater stenosis of the ipsilateral internal carotid artery in 36 (67%) of 54 patients with presumed cortical TIAs, but in only 1 (6%) of 17 patients with presumed lacunar TIAs (p less than 0.0001).  These findings support the view that cortical TIAs are associated with ipsilateral extracranial internal carotid artery atheromatous disease, whereas patients with lacunar TIAs may have absent or insignificant large-vessel disease, and probable intracranial small-vessel disease.  Accurate distinction between lacunar and cortical events may have implications for investigation and treatment of patients with TIAs.
Degenerative aortic stenosis. One effect of the graying of America.  Degenerative calcific aortic stenosis is evolving as a common geriatric problem.  Once symptoms develop, it is a highly lethal disease that does not respond well to medical therapy.  Aortic balloon valvuloplasty may offer palliation but is unlikely to alter the overall course of the disease.  Aortic valve replacement is the therapy of choice, but high perioperative morbidity and mortality rates can be expected in the very elderly.  The presence of other appreciable cardiac disorders may contribute to the occurrence of postoperative complications.  Patients with asymptomatic aortic stenosis and normal left ventricular function can be treated medically and followed with serial aortic valve area determinations using Doppler echocardiography.
When is pulmonary artery catheterization worth the risks?  Bedside pulmonary artery catheterization has proven to be an important addition to the clinical assessment of critically ill patients.  Properly used, the procedure may provide hemodynamic information that is not apparent from physical examination or radiography.  It may be safely accomplished through various venous routes, but care must be taken to avoid potential complications.
Relationship between blood groups and behavior patterns in men who have had myocardial infarction.  Consistent correlations have been found between physical dysfunctional states and blood factors.  Some of these disorders have possible psychosomatic components (eg, duodenal ulcer, myocardial infarction).  This study focused on the relationship between blood types and various indices of behavior patterns (eg, type A behavior scores, anger ratings) in young patients who had had an initial myocardial infarction.  Patients with blood type O scored significantly higher on type A behavior scales and related indices than those having blood type A.  Those with blood group B responded on several scales between those with types A and O.  We discuss the utility of blood groupings in future research in the prediction of myocardial infarction, methodologic limitations, the relationship of these results to temperament studies, Jenkins Activity Survey subtest patterns, anti-H reactivity pattern, and hypotheses relating blood factors and behavioral traits in patients with psychosomatic disorders.
Comparative clinical pharmacology of calcium channel blockers.  Calcium channel blockers are effective antihypertensive agents, both as initial monotherapy and in combination with other antihypertensive agents.  These drugs are also effective in the treatment of chronic, stable angina, variant angina and supraventricular arrhythmias.  Drugs in this class have different affinities for calcium channels in vascular smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, cardiac sinus and atrioventricular node.  They are all useful in hypertension and angina, but only verapamil and diltiazem are also useful in the control of heart rate and supraventricular arrhythmias.  Nimodipine may control vascular spasm following subarachnoid hemorrhage.  Calcium channel blockers have also been used in the treatment of migraine headache and Raynaud's phenomenon.
Complete left main coronary artery occlusion: angiographic evaluation of collateral vessel patterns and assessment of hemodynamic correlates.  An angiographic study of eight patients with total occlusion of the left main coronary artery identified six patients with chronic occlusion and two with acute complete occlusion.  In each of six patients, there were two to six different intercoronary collateral pathways.  Altogether, a total of 13 specific collateral channels were recognized.  One patient had evidence of unique homocollaterals represented by enlarged vasa vasorum, which created a vascular cuff that surrounded a totally obstructed left main artery.  The ventricular function and hemodynamic parameters in these patients not only depend on the collateral vessels but may also be affected by the severity of coronary artery disease in the artery that supplies collaterals.
Dilatation of the left ventricular cavity on dipyridamole thallium-201 imaging: a new marker of triple-vessel disease.  To investigate the significance and mechanism of dilatation of the left ventricular cavity on dipyridamole thallium-201 imaging, we performed both dipyridamole thallium-201 imaging and dipyridamole radionuclide angiography on 83 patients with known angiograms.  The dipyridamole/delayed ratio of the left ventricular dimension from the thallium-201 image was defined as the left ventricular dilatation ratio (LVDR).  An LVDR greater than the mean + two standard deviations in patients without coronary artery disease was defined as abnormal.  Twenty-two of 83 patients showed an abnormal LVDR, and 18 of the 22 patients (82%) had triple-vessel disease.  By defect and washout analysis, the sensitivity and specificity for correctly identifying the patients as having triple-vessel disease was 72% and 76%, respectively, whereas LVDR had a sensitivity of 72% and a specificity of 93%.  When LVDR was used in combination with the defect and washout criteria, sensitivity increased to 84% without a loss of specificity.  In those 22 patients with abnormal LVDRs, end-diastolic volume measured by radionuclide angiography did not change after dipyridamole infusion.  Dilatation of the left ventricular cavity on dipyridamole thallium-201 imaging reflected relative subendocardial hypoperfusion induced by dipyridamole rather than actual chamber enlargement.  The LVDR was moderately sensitive and highly specific for triple-vessel disease and provided complementary information to dipyridamole thallium-201 imaging.
Percutaneous balloon valvotomy for patients with mitral stenosis: initial and follow-up results.  Percutaneous double balloon mitral valvotomy (PMV) was performed in 25 patients with severe mitral stenosis who were followed for at least 6 months after the procedure.  There were 22 women and 3 men, with a mean age of 51 +/- 14 years (range, 27 to 74).  Hemodynamic and angiographic findings were evaluated before and after PMV and clinical status was assessed at follow-up.  There was a significant decrease in mitral gradient following PMV, from 15.4 +/- 5.1 to 5.0 +/- 2.6 mm Hg (p less than .0001); an increase in cardiac output, from 4.6 +/- 1.1 to 5.2 +/- 1.1 L/min (p less than .01); and an increase in calculated mitral valve area, from 0.9 +/- 0.2 to 2.2 +/- 0.6 cm2 (p less than 0.0001).  Mitral regurgitation developed or increased in severity in six patients (24%).  At the time of follow-up (mean, 12 +/- 5 months), three patients required elective mitral valve replacement for symptomatic mitral regurgitation and 91% (20 of 22) of the remaining patients had continued improvement in functional class.  PMV can safely be performed in properly selected patients with symptomatic mitral stenosis with good immediate and follow-up results.
Value and limitations of Doppler pressure half-time in quantifying mitral stenosis: a comparison with micromanometer catheter recordings.  The purpose of this study was to compare the Doppler and catheterization pressure half-time methods of estimating mitral valve area with valve areas obtained by the Gorlin equation in a group of patients with clinically significant mitral stenosis.  Data were analyzed from 67 consecutive patients who were undergoing continuous-wave Doppler examination and catheterization with micromanometer catheters.  Doppler pressure half-time was calculated as the interval between peak transmitral velocity and velocity divided by the square root of 2, as measured from the outer border of the spectral envelope.  Doppler mitral valve area (MVA) was obtained with the equation: MVA = 220 divided by pressure half-time.  For catheterization data, the pressure half-time was measured directly from simultaneously recorded left ventricular and left atrial pressure (18 patients) or pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (49 patients).  The catheterization half-time was taken as the time required for the peak pressure gradient to fall to one half of the initial value.  Calculations of the mitral valve area at catheterization were obtained by the Gorlin equation with pressure gradient and cardiac output determinations.  Mitral valve area as determined by the Gorlin equation for all cases ranged from 0.4 to 2.0 (mean = 1.03 +/- 0.37) cm2.  Linear regression analysis that compared cardiac catheterization and Doppler half-times yielded r = 0.68.  For the subgroup of patients with sinus rhythm, the correlation improved to r = 0.76.
Flosequinan: a vasodilator with positive inotropic activity.  Flosequinan is an oral arterial and venous vasodilator that is currently under investigation for the treatment of congestive heart failure.  The effects of flosequinan on ventricular performance and myocardial contractility were studied in 10 patients with severe congestive heart failure during right and left cardiac catheterization.  Sixty minutes after a 100 mg oral dose of flosequinan, the peak rate of rise in left ventricular pressure (dP/dt) increased from 940 +/- 180 to 1050 +/- 240 mm Hg/sec (p less than 0.05), while left ventricular end-diastolic pressure decreased from 32 +/- 5 to 26 +/- 8 mm Hg (p less than 0.05), and cardiac index increased (2.1 +/- 0.4 to 2.3 +/- 0.5 L/min/m2, (p less than 0.05).  The mean pulmonary artery pressure and vascular resistance decreased from 40 +/- 8 to 33 +/- 12 mm Hg (p less than 0.05) and from 330 +/- 240 to 290 +/- 170 dyne-sec/cm5 (p less than 0.05), respectively.  Heart rate, mean aortic pressure, right atrial pressure, systemic vascular resistance, and serum norepinephrine levels did not change significantly.  The increase in left ventricular peak dP/dt that was concomitant with a decrease in left ventricular end-diastolic pressure, and no change in systemic arterial pressure or sympathetic tone, argue for a direct positive inotropic effect of flosequinan.
Dietary taurine deficiency and dilated cardiomyopathy in the fox.  Taurine deficiency has been implicated as a potential cause of dilated cardiomyopathy.  However, the relationship between taurine and myocardial function is presently unclear.  The purpose of this study was to determine whether dilated cardiomyopathy in the fox is associated with dietary taurine deficiency.  A total of 68 foxes from farms with a history of death caused by dilated cardiomyopathy and 14 foxes from a farm with no history of dilated cardiomyopathy were studied.  Dilated cardiomyopathy was diagnosed by echocardiography in 48% of the foxes from one farm with a positive history and in none of the foxes from the control farm.  Foxes less than 9 months of age were more commonly affected than older foxes (p = 0.03).  Plasma taurine concentrations were significantly less (p less than 0.01) in foxes that had dilated cardiomyopathy (26.8 +/- 16.4 nmol/ml) than in the control foxes (99.3 +/- 60.2 nmol/ml).  A significantly higher (p less than 0.01) incidence of dilated cardiomyopathy was present in foxes with a history of a sibling or offspring that died of dilated cardiomyopathy than in foxes without a family history of cardiac death.  In one fox with dilated cardiomyopathy that was tested, the myocardial taurine concentration was lower (1.7 mumol/gm wet weight) than that of control foxes (7.3 +/- 1.6 mumol/gm wet weight).  Hepatic cysteinesulfinic acid decarboxylase activity was significantly less (p less than 0.001) in foxes with dilated cardiomyopathy (0.97 +/- 0.2 nmol/mm.mg protein) than in control foxes (2.11 +/- 0.07 nmol CO2/mm.mg protein).
Beat-to-beat detection of ventricular late potentials with high-resolution electrocardiography.  To detect dynamic changes of VLPs we developed a low-noise, HR-ECG with a gain of 10(5)-10(6)X.  This system allows the beat-to-beat detection of low-amplitude signals at the bedside in a nonshielded room without any averaging process.  Analysis was performed in 39 normal subjects (group A: 27 men, 12 women, mean age, 28 +/- 8 years), in 98 patients with coronary artery disease without documented sustained ventricular tachycardia (group B: 86 men, 12 women, mean age, 59 +/- 10 years) and in 41 patients coronary artery disease with sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (group C: 36 men, 5 women; mean age 63 +/- 9 years).  Comparison was made with time-domain signal-averaging (SA-ECG) in all cases at the same electrode position and with identical band-pass filtering.  In group A no VLPs were detected; the total filtered QRS duration was 84 +/- 8 msec (mean +/- SD), and the time interval during which the terminal QRS did not exceed 40 microV (I-40) was less than 30 msec in all cases (mean, 17 +/- 6 msec).  In group B, VLPs were detected by HR-ECG in 34 of 98 patients (35%); the total QRS duration was 102 +/- 16 msec (mean +/- SD, p less than 0.01 vs group A), and the I-40 was 29 +/- 13 msec (mean +/- SD, p less than 0.01 vs (group A).  In group C, VLPs were detected by HR-ECG in 38 of 41 patients (93%); the total QRS duration was 123 +/- 22 msec (mean +/- SD, p less than 0.01 vs group A and group B), and the I-40 was 40 +/- 14 msec (mean +/- SD, p less than 0.01 vs group A and group B).  Concordant results between HR-ECG and SA-ECG were observed in 91% of the cases (59 positive and 103 negative results).  Late potentials that exhibited dynamic variations were detected by HR-ECG alone in 13 cases, and very low amplitude VLPs were detected by SA-ECG alone in three cases.  In conclusion, the present study demonstrates the feasibility of body-surface recording of VLPs on a beat-to-beat basis, without any averaging process, at the bedside in a nonshielded room.  This new approach may allow the study of dynamic changes of VLPs during spontaneous ventricular arrhythmias or ischemia.
Risk stratification in survivors of acute myocardial infarction: routine cardiac catheterization and angiography is a reasonable approach in most patients [editorial]  Noninvasive risk assessment in survivors of AMI can effectively subdivide patients into groups with differing risk profiles after hospital discharge, but some patients at risk for late death or recurrent AMI may be incorrectly identified; data from cardiac catheterization and angiography provide complementary and generally more powerful prognostic information.  Many patients may derive particular benefit from early cardiac catheterization and angiography, including: (1) patients with AMI complicated by recurrent myocardial ischemia, congestive heart failure, and/or complex ventricular arrhythmias; (2) patients with abnormal or inconclusive results of noninvasive testing or those patients unable to perform an exercise test; (3) patients with abnormal left ventricular global systolic function and those with increased left ventricular end-systolic volume; (4) "young" patients (younger than 50 years of age?); (5) older patients (older than 65 to 70 years of age?); (6) patients with non-Q wave AMI; and (7) patients who are receiving thrombolytic therapy.  Performance of early cardiac catheterization and angiography in virtually all survivors of AMI, with selective use of appropriate noninvasive tests, may provide a more efficacious means of risk assessment after AMI; if all tests are performed judiciously, the cost of such an approach need not be excessive.  A combination of invasive and selected noninvasive tests probably provides optimal information.  The risks to the routine performance of diagnostic cardiac catheterization and angiography in all survivors of AMI are: (1) adequate care and attention may not be paid to proper performance of the procedure(s) and to detailed and proper analyses of the data; (2) the need for additional noninvasive testing in selected patients may be ignored; and most importantly, (3) premature or unnecessary revascularization procedures may be performed subsequently.  For optimal patient care, the clinician must obtain all necessary data, avoid unnecessary and repetitive tests, know the accuracy of individual tests at his or her own facility, interpret all data in proper context, and then counsel patients objectively about available management strategies.  With this approach, all patients who might appropriately benefit from coronary artery revascularization will be correctly identified, and patients who are truly at very low risk (minimal residual coronary artery disease and preserved left ventricular function particularly if associated with a patent infarct-related artery) may be similarly identified and managed appropriately with elimination of unnecessary additional testing and pharmacologic therapy.  Finally, whatever approach to risk stratification one chooses for an individual patient, the importance of and the need to correct and/or ameliorate risk factors for coronary artery disease must be recognized and undertaken.
Prognostic importance of delayed Q-wave evolution 3 to 24 hours after initiation of thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction.  The timing of Q-wave evolution and its prognostic significance was studied in 201 patients who received thrombolytic therapy for a first acute myocardial infarction (AMI).  One hundred forty-one patients (70%) had evidence of a Q-wave AMI within 3 hours of the initiation of thrombolytic therapy, 31 (16%) developed Q waves after 3 hours but before hospital discharge, and 29 (14%) were discharged with a non-Q-wave AMI.  Laboratory indicators of myocardial damage and in-hospital morbidity and mortality were greater among patients with Q-wave AMIs than with non-Q-wave AMIs.  When these indexes were examined with respect to the timing of Q-wave evolution, the prognosis of patients with delayed Q-wave development was similar to that of patients with non-Q-wave AMIs.  Thus, compared to patients with early (less than or equal to 3 hours) Q-wave evolution, patients with delayed Q-wave evolution or with a non-Q-wave AMI had a smaller creatine kinase peak (mean 661 to 1,081 vs 1,251 to 1,541 IU; p = 0.005), better preservation of left ventricular function as measured by radionuclide ventriculography before discharge (mean +/- standard deviation 54 +/- 11% vs 47 +/- 13%; p less than 0.01), and a lower incidence of congestive heart failure at discharge (3 vs 15%; p = 0.02).  In-hospital mortality was lower among patients with delayed Q-wave evolution or with a non-Q-wave AMI (5 of 141 vs 0 of 60; difference not significant).
Immediate and short-term results of a 1988-1989 coronary angioplasty registry.  To determine the relevance of recent refinements in angioplasty technology to our particular practice, the records of 507 consecutive patients undergoing a first percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) at our center between October 1988 and May 1989 were reviewed.  At the time of PTCA, 41% of these patients had class IV angina and 44% were identified as having multivessel disease.  Dilatation was attempted in 734 lesions (mean 1.5 per patient), of which 95 (13%) were chronic total occlusions.  Overall, 69% of the 734 lesions were judged anatomically complex, and, in dilating these lesions, a rail-type device was used almost exclusively.  Successful dilatation was achieved in 659 of the 734 (90%) attempted lesions.  There were low incidences of the major complications of death (0.4%), myocardial infarction (1.8%) and emergency bypass surgery (1.8%).  Acute rethrombosis occurred in 54 patients (11%).  In these patients, initial strategy of repeat dilatation was successful in 38 of 47 patients (81%).  Overall, primary clinical success at PTCA was achieved in 480 patients (95%).  At a mean follow-up of 7.5 +/- 1.5 months in 497 of the study patients, the event-free rate (freedom from cardiac death, myocardial infarction, repeat PTCA or coronary bypass surgery or recurrence of severe [class III to IV] angina) was 71%.  In conclusion, despite the often complex coronary disease in patients currently presenting to our center, a high initial success rate and acceptable short-term outcome of PTCA was achieved.
Sustained reduction in valvular regurgitation and atrial volumes with tailored vasodilator therapy in advanced congestive heart failure secondary to dilated (ischemic or idiopathic) cardiomyopathy.  Afterload reduction therapy can acutely improve hemodynamic function in patients with advanced heart failure; however, it is unknown if initial reductions in mitral and tricuspid regurgitation and atrial volumes can be sustained with oral therapy.  Atrial volumes and atrioventricular valve regurgitation were measured using 2-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography with color-flow imaging in 14 patients with dilated heart failure (ejection fraction 17 +/- 4%) before and after 3 +/- 1 days of intensive vasodilator and diuretic therapy tailored to hemodynamic goals.  Echocardiography was repeated again after 6 +/- 2 months on oral vasodilators and a flexible diuretic regimen.  Acute therapy reduced systemic vascular resistance from 1,760 +/- 460 to 1,010 +/- 310 dynes.s.cm-5, pulmonary artery wedge pressure from 30 +/- 5 to 17 +/- 4 mm Hg, and right atrial pressure from 13 +/- 5 to 7 +/- 3 mm Hg, and led to a 61% increase in stroke volume (from 36 +/- 10 to 58 +/- 14 ml) (p less than 0.01).  Mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, determined by color-flow fraction, initially decreased from 0.34 +/- 0.17 to 0.20 +/- 0.20 and from 0.33 +/- 0.15 to 0.13 +/- 0.13, respectively (p less than 0.001).  This reduction was sustained at 6 months.  Significant decreases occurred with acute therapy, with further reductions at 6 months in both mean left atrial volume (from 100 +/- 25 to 80 +/- 19 to 65 +/- 15 cm3) and right atrial volume (from 85 +/- 23 to 64 +/- 23 to 52 +/- 14 cm3) (p less than 0.001).
Frequency and severity of mitral regurgitation one year after balloon mitral valvuloplasty.  Mitral regurgitation (MR) was evaluated by Doppler echocardiography in 59 patients with mitral stenosis before, immediately after and 1 year after balloon mitral valvuloplasty (BMV).  The severity of MR was graded on a scale from 1+ to 4+.  Echocardiographic and hemodynamic variables were analyzed to study the potential factor(s) that might predict the long-term persistence of MR.  Echocardiographic variables were mitral valve thickness and motion, subvalvular change, left atrial dimension, commissural calcification and effective balloon/mitral anular diameters.  Hemodynamic variables were mitral pressure gradient, pulmonary arterial pressure, ejection fraction, mitral valve area index, age, gender and cardiac rhythm.  Mitral valve area index increased from 0.9 +/- 0.5 to 1.5 +/- 0.8 cm2/m2 immediately after BMW, and to 1.4 +/- 0.3 cm2/m2 at 1 year follow-up (p less than 0.01).  Immediately after BMV, MR grading did not change in 30 patients (51%), increased by 1+ in 23 patients (39%), by 2+ in 2 patients (3.3%) and by 3+ in 2 patients (3.3%), and decreased by 1+ in 2 others.  At 1-year follow-up, only 1 patient with severe MR required valve replacement.  Fifty-one patients (88%) had no change in the extent of MR (less than or equal to 1+) and 6 patients (10%) had a 1-grade decrease in their MR; only 1 patient had a 1-grade increase in MR.  No clinical or hemodynamic variables or morphologic characteristics of the mitral valve could predict the development of significant MR after BMV.  It is concluded that an increment in MR severity less than or equal to 2+ is frequently seen after BMV.
Uses and limitations of transthoracic echocardiography in the assessment of atrial septal defect in the adult.  Two-dimensional and color Doppler echocardiography accurately detected the presence of an atrial septal defect (ASD) in 47 of 50 adults (mean age 40 years) confirmed by surgery or cardiac catheterization, or both.  It correctly categorized all patients with ostium secundum and ostium primum ASD but misdiagnosed 3 of 5 patients with surgically proven sinus venosus ASD.  The shunt flow volume across the ASD was calculated with the standard Doppler equation, and assuming the ASD to be circular correlated with shunt flow volume obtained by cardiac catheterization (r = 0.74).  The maximum width of the color flow signals moving across the ASD was taken as its diameter.  Mean flow velocity was determined either by placing a pulsed Doppler sample volume parallel to the flow across the ASD as visualized by color Doppler or by color M-mode examination, which allowed determination of flow velocities using a previously validated method that incorporates a computer analysis of pixel color intensity.  The pulmonary to systemic blood flow ratio obtained by color-guided conventional Doppler interrogation of the left and right ventricular outflow tracts correlated poorly with cardiac catheterization results (r = 0.38).  In patients with associated tricuspid regurgitation, the peak systolic pulmonary artery pressure obtained by color Doppler-guided continuous-wave Doppler correlated well with that obtained at cardiac catheterization (r = 0.89).  The maximum color Doppler jet width of the flow across the ASD poorly correlated with ASD size estimated at surgery (r = 0.50).
Congestive heart failure, coronary events and atherothrombotic brain infarction in elderly blacks and whites with systemic hypertension and with and without echocardiographic and electrocardiographic evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy.  Hypertension was present in 50% of 196 blacks and in 36% of 382 whites (p less than 0.001).  A prospective study of 84 elderly blacks (70% women) and 326 elderly whites (73% women) with hypertension correlated echocardiographic and electrocardiographic left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy with incidences of congestive heart failure (CHF), coronary events and atherothrombotic brain infarction (ABI).  Echocardiographic LV hypertrophy (p less than 0.02) and concentric LV hypertrophy (p less than 0.001) were more prevalent in hypertensive blacks than in hypertensive whites.  Hypertensive blacks were younger (78 +/- 9 years) than hypertensive whites (82 +/- 7 years) (p less than 0.001).  Other coronary risk factors were similar, except for higher serum triglycerides in whites than in blacks (p less than 0.02).  Follow-up was 37 +/- 18 months in blacks and 43 +/- 18 months in whites (p less than 0.01).  Incidences of CHF and coronary events were not significantly different in blacks and whites.  ABI incidence was 38% in blacks and 21% in whites (p less than 0.005).  Multiple logistic regression analysis showed that prior CHF (p = 0.000), concentric LV hypertrophy (p = 0.018) and echocardiographic LV hypertrophy (p = 0.022) were independent risk factors for CHF.  Echocardiographic LV hypertrophy (p = 0.001), serum total cholesterol (p = 0.002), concentric LV hypertrophy (p = 0.005) and prior coronary artery disease (p = 0.042) were independent risk factors for coronary events.  Prior ABI (p = 0.001), echocardiographic LV hypertrophy (p = 0.001) and electrocardiographic LV hypertrophy (p = 0.034) were independent risk factors for ABI.
Evaluation of the pharmacokinetics and electrocardiographic effects of intravenous verapamil with intravenous calcium chloride pretreatment in normal subjects.  To evaluate the effects of calcium pretreatment on the disposition and electrocardiographic effects of verapamil, 8 healthy male volunteers received treatment in each of 3 phases in a randomized, double-blind, crossover manner.  Phase I denoted 10 ml of 0.9% intravenous sodium chloride followed by 10 mg of intravenous verapamil; phase II denoted 10 ml of 10% intravenous calcium chloride followed by 4 ml of 0.9% intravenous sodium chloride; and phase III denoted 10 ml of 10% intravenous calcium chloride followed by 10 mg of intravenous verapamil.  Blood samples for the determination of verapamil concentrations were drawn at 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 45, 60 and 90 minutes, and at 2, 4, 6, 10 and 24 hours.  Blood pressure, heart rate and PR intervals were also measured at these times.  Pretreatment of verapamil with intravenous calcium did not alter the disposition of intravenous verapamil.  Blood pressure was not significantly altered in any treatment phase, although calcium tended to increase mean arterial pressure and verapamil abolished this effect.  Calcium had no significant affect on verapamil-induced PR prolongation (maximum percent change in PR interval: phase I = 19 +/- 11%, phase III = 18 +/- 7%; time to maximal prolongation: phase I = 0.38 +/- 0.21 hours, phase III = 0.37 +/- 0.26 hours; and area under the percent change in PR vs time curve: phase I = 15.5 +/- 10, phase III = 21 +/- 9).  Verapamil caused a reflex increase in heart rate of similar magnitude in both phases I and III (24 +/- 10% and 21 +/- 7%, respectively).
Are people more health conscious? A longitudinal study of one community.  Secular changes in cardiovascular health awareness, knowledge and behavior were observed in four biennial cross-sectional surveys and a cohort survey in a New England community.  These changes are not related to more health promotion activities in the social milieu of respondents, but are more likely due to national mass media health campaigns, the effects of which may influence outcomes of community-based cardiovascular disease prevention studies.
Intraoperative detection of patent foramen ovale by transesophageal echocardiography.  This study reports the intraoperative use of contrast and Doppler echocardiography techniques to diagnose patent foramen ovale (PFO).  Fifty patients without known atrial septal defects undergoing elective cardiovascular surgery were studied.  A 5-MHz esophageal echocardiographic probe was used to image the fossa ovalis (FO) and 10 ml agitated saline was injected into the right atrium during apnea.  Echocardiographic contrast was then injected during end-inspiration at 20-cmH2O airway pressure.  When opacification of the right atrium was complete, the airway pressure was released.  During these maneuvers, color and pulsed-wave Doppler interrogation of the atrial septum were also performed.  Right-to-left passage of saline contrast across the interatrial septum was seen in 11 of 50 patients (22%).  Doppler echocardiography demonstrated a PFO in 2 patients without contrast evidence of shunting.  Thus, the combination of contrast and Doppler echocardiography identified a 26% (13 of 50) prevalence of PFO, approximating the previously reported autopsy rate of 25%.  These contrast and Doppler techniques may be useful in detecting patients at risk for paradoxical emboli and in identifying candidates for closure of the PFO.
Active drainage of cardiac lymph in relation to reduction in size of myocardial infarction: an experimental study.  Active drainage of cardiac lymph using hyaluronidase was attempted in dogs.  The results were satisfactory and the ischemic myocardium was salvaged.  The infarct risk area (I/R) ratio decreased after drainage.  Regional myocardial ischemia and infarction were provided by means of ligature of the left coronary artery for 120 and 240 minutes respectively.  Cardiac lymph was collected by conventional procedures.  Enzymes released from the myocardium increased significantly in the cardiac lymph.  The volume of cardiac lymph gradually increased after ligature of the coronary artery.  Administration of hyaluronidase further increased the cardiac lymph flow and significantly decreased the I/R ratio as determined by triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (TTC) and methylene blue staining.  Drainage of the cardiac lymph salvaged the ischemic myocardium.  Reduction of interstitial edema and augmentation of cardiac lymph flow with the hyaluronidase prevented the development of the infarction.  This is the first documentation of the effect of active drainage of cardiac lymph on the development of infarction through observation of the I/R ratio.
Therapy of ischemic cardiomyopathy with pentoxifylline.  Abnormal blood rheology is a known characteristics of coronary artery disease.  The authors evaluated the effects of pentoxifylline on the exercise capacity ejection fraction and symptoms of 9 patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy.  All patients had signs and symptoms of left ventricular dysfunction.  All had at least two major vessels obstructed as determined by coronary angiography.  Pentoxifylline 400 mg three times daily was administered for twelve weeks.  Seven of 9 patients responded with increases in ejection fraction and exercise tolerance.  Exercise tolerance correlated with improvement or lack of improvement in ejection fraction.  For all patients at twelve weeks post-therapy mean ejection fraction increased 9.8% over baseline (p = .07), total treadmill time increased 15% (p = .27), and mean double product increased 13% (p = .03).  Anginal symptoms were significantly improved over baseline at twelve weeks of therapy (p greater than .001), as well as dyspnea on exertion (p = .03).  Pentoxifylline was well tolerated.  Pentoxifylline may benefit ischemic cardiomyopathy by improving coronary perfusion owing to favorable alterations in hemorheologic properties.
The effect of dopexamine HCl upon collateral perfusion of the acutely ischemic myocardium in anesthetized dogs.  The effects of low-dose (10(-9) and 3 x 10(-9) mole/kg/min) infusions of dopexamine HCl, a new synthetic catecholamine with beta 2-adrenergic and DA1-dopaminergic agonostic actions, was tested in anesthetized dogs, with and without acute ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery.  The infusions caused diastolic arterial blood pressure to fall by 12 +/- 4 and 23 +/- 5 mmHg, respectively.  Microsphere-estimated collateral blood flow to the ischemic myocardium did not change significantly during the drug infusions.  The findings suggest that low doses of dopexamine HCl do not cause coronary "steal" from acutely ischemic myocardium.
Aortic dissection with a fistulous communication into the right atrium: a case report.  A case of aortic dissection (type 1, De Bakey) with a rent into the right atrium (RA), diagnosed by echocardiography (echo) and confirmed by aortography, is reported.  The patient presented with cardiac failure and a continuous murmur in the right second and third intercostal spaces.  The patient has survived for two years with medial treatment.
Relation between three-dimensional geometry of the inflow tract to the orifice and the area, shape, and velocity of regurgitant color Doppler jets: an in vitro study.  The relation between three-dimensional geometry of the inflow tract to the orifice and the area, shape, and velocity of regurgitant jets was studied in a pulsatile in vitro color Doppler flow model.  A 2.5 MHz transducer connected to a diagnostic ultrasound machine was placed in a water tank facing pulsatile jets (duration, 0.5 second) obtained by a calibrated injector.  Flow rate from 6 to 52 ml/sec were tested through a 5 mm diameter circular orifice.  Four different three-dimensional inflow tract geometries were compared: (A) sharp-edged, (B) Venturi (funnel), (C) converging conical, and (D) diverging conical.  Mean velocities of jets were measured by continuous-wave Doppler echocardiography.  Driving pressures were also measured by means of a fluid-filled catheter.  Two observers independently digitized contours of maximal color jet areas by computer system from two separate sets of experiments.  Results are given as the mean values of the four measurements for each parameter.  Jet areas were correlated to flow rate, with no difference from A through D.  The shape (eccentricity) of jets was different between A and B (p less than 0.05), between B and D (p less than 0.01), and between C and D (p less than 0.01).  The shape of jets was correlated with flow rate, continuous-wave velocity, and pressure gradient in B, C, and D but not in A.  Measured pressure gradients and estimated gradients by continuous-wave Doppler echocardiography were similarly correlated from A through D.
The reproducibility of intravascular ultrasound imaging in vitro.  To determine which factors may affect the image quality when an intravascular ultrasound catheter is used in vivo, the influence of blood, temperature change, and contrast media were evaluated.  In addition, to confirm the reproducibility of intravascular ultrasound imaging to measure cross-sectional lumen area, intraobserver and interobserver variability were determined.  The findings indicated that ultrasound images in blood are mildly attenuated, that changes from room temperature to body temperature do not have a significant impact on the image quality, that contrast media attenuates the image intensity in a dose-dependent manner, and that the intravascular ultrasound imaging catheter provides a reproducible method for measuring arterial lumen area with excellent intraobserver and interobserver correlation.
The natural history of left ventricular spontaneous contrast.  Spontaneous contrast in the left ventricle is an unusual entity.  We retrospectively studied 16 patients who were found to have spontaneous contrast present on two-dimensional echocardiograms, specifically noting their clinical characteristics, the reproducibility of this phenomenon, the presence of thrombi and embolic events, and prognostic implications.  Diagnoses included ischemic heart disease in nine patients, dilated cardiomyopathy in six patients, and hypertensive cardiomyopathy in one patient.  The mean ejection fraction was 17.6%.  There were six thromboembolic events in four patients.  The spontaneous contrast was reproducible for periods of time up to 39 months.  Patients who had improvement in their left ventricular dysfunction or who underwent aneurysmectomy had disappearance of the spontaneous contrast.  Those patients who had spontaneous contrast reproduced on subsequent echocardiograms did not seem to have a worse prognosis than patients with similarly depressed ventricular function, but a larger study is necessary to verify this.
Role of ultrasonic tissue characterization to distinguish reversible from irreversible myocardial injury.  Tissue characterization reflects structural and functional integrity of tissues.  Inasmuch as reversible ischemia causes no structural damage and irreversible ischemia results in persistent structural myocardial damage, we postulated that ultrasonic tissue characterization can distinguish the two types of injuries.  Anesthetized open chest dogs underwent 15 minutes (group 1, n = 5) and 90 minutes (group 2, n = 8) of acute total occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary artery, followed by 3 hours of reperfusion.  Myocardial ischemia-infarction was confirmed with segment shortening, electronmicroscopic examination, and triphenyl tetrazolium chloride staining.  Integrated backscatter Rayleigh 5 (IBR5), a measure of ultrasonic backscatter, and Fourier coefficient of amplitude modulation (FAM), an index of cardiac cycle dependent variation in backscatter, were measured at baseline, during ischemia, and after reperfusion.  Group 1 (reversible ischemia) showed an increase in IBR5 from -48 +/- 1.2 dB at control to -45 +/- 1.0 dB (p less than 0.01) during ischemia, which returned to baseline after reperfusion (-47 +/- 1.3 dB).  FAM was blunted during ischemia (6.2 +/- 1.0 dB during control versus 1.2 +/- 1.0 dB during ischemia, p less than 0.01) and recovered completely during reperfusion.  Segment shortening was abolished during ischemia (18% +/- 3% during control versus -12% +/- 5% during ischemia, p less than 0.01) and recovered partially during reperfusion (4% +/- 5%).  The group 2 animals with irreversible myocardial injury showed an increase in IBR5, from -49 +/- 1.2 dB during control to -44 +/- 1.0 dB during ischemia (p less than 0.01) and paradoxical bulging of the ischemic region (17% +/- 3% to -7% +/- 3%, p less than 0.01) during ischemia.
Quantitative echocardiographic analysis of global and regional left ventricular function: a problem revisited.  We recorded two-dimensional echocardiograms simultaneously with the respiration measurements of 20 normal subjects and 20 patients with anterior myocardial infarction.  The apical long-axis and four-chamber views were quantitatively analyzed.  Measurement variability of global ejection fraction and regional ejection fraction of 100 regions was calculated during inspiration and at end-expiration for two observers.  To minimize variability, the endocardial contour was redefined and traced with an improved computer-assisted tracing system.  Variability (absolute mean difference) between two beats at end-expiration was significantly less than during inspiration (p less than 0.05): for ejection fraction the variability at end-expiration was 3.4% and the variability during inspiration was 6.4% (mean, 54%; SD, 7%); for regional ejection fraction the variability at end-expiration was 11.8% and the variability during inspiration was 21.5% (mean, 56%; SD, 15%).  Intraobserver and interobserver variability values of one beat at end-expiration for ejection fraction were 3.1% and 3.8%, respectively, and 9.5% and 12.8%, respectively, for regional ejection fraction.  Variability in patients with myocardial infarction was comparable.  This method of recording respiration and analyzing left ventricular function at end-expiration, with a new contour definition and tracing system, provides a measurement variability that is considerably less than that reported in previous echocardiographic studies and that is comparable to angiographic methods.
Fenestrated atrial septal aneurysm: diagnosis by transesophageal echocardiography.  The diagnosis of atrial septal defect by transthoracic echocardiography remains difficult in a small subset of patients because of either suboptimal acoustic windows or unusual anatomy, for example, fenestrated defects.  We report the case of a 55-year-old woman with a fenestrated atrial septal aneurysm that was incompletely visualized by transthoracic echocardiography.  Subsequent transesophageal echocardiography demonstrated three defects within the atrial septal aneurysm with left-to-right shunting across each defect.  Normal pulmonary venous connections were also defined.  All echocardiographic findings were confirmed at surgery.  This case demonstrates the additional diagnostic accuracy of transesophageal echocardiography for detecting disease of the atrial septum.
Sustained improvement in left ventricular function after successful coronary angioplasty.  The short and long term effects of successful percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty on left ventricular function, at rest and on exercise were investigated in 49 patients.  Thirty-four had had no previous infarction (group 1) and 15 had (group 2).  Technetium-99m gated blood pool images were obtained at rest and during exercise before, six weeks after, and a mean of fifteen months after successful angioplasty.  Before angioplasty the mean (SD) ejection fraction fell significantly on exercise in both groups from 58 (10)% to 53 (13)% in group 1 and from 48 (10)% to 40 (16)% in group 2.  This change was paralleled by a worsening wall motion score (from 0.6 (0.4) to 1.6 (1.2) in group 1 and from 2.3 (1.9) to 3.3 (2.4) in group 2).  Six weeks after the procedure there was little change in resting ejection fraction but it increased significantly on exercise (to 62 (11)% in group 1 and to 53 (13)% in group 2).  There was a concomitant significant improvement in the exercise wall motion score (to 0.4 (0.6) in group 1 and to 1.8 (1.1) in group 2).  This improvement in exercise ejection fraction and wall motion was maintained at later follow up with no significant deterioration in either variable and a clearly sustained improvement in ejection fraction (60 (10)% in group 1 and 51 (10)% in group 2) and wall motion score (0.2 (0.2) in group 1 and 1.3 (0.8) in group 2) compared with values before angioplasty.
Post-extrasystolic potentiation without a compensatory pause in normal and diseased hearts.  Variables derived from left ventricular volume were used to study post-extrasystolic potentiation.  Left ventriculograms were obtained from 11 healthy individuals and 49 patients with coronary heart disease (30 with a previous myocardial infarction and 19 without any signs of myocardial damage).  Post-extrasystolic potentiation was induced by a regularly driven right atrial rhythm that was interrupted by one atrial extrasystole in such a way that the post-extrasystolic RR interval was kept equal to the basic RR interval.  The left ventricular end diastolic volumes of the pre-extrasystolic and post-extrasystolic beats were equal.  In all groups there was evidence of post-extrasystolic potentiation in one or more of the indices of left ventricular function (ejection fraction, mean normalised systolic ejection rate, and systolic volume, and stroke volume).  Potentiation was especially evident in patients with left ventricular damage; this suggests that a compensating mechanism is an intrinsic property of the myocardium.  The Frank-Starling mechanism does not contribute to the increased performance of the post-extrasystolic beat in normal individuals or in patients with coronary artery disease.
Streptokinase treatment for femoral artery thrombosis after arterial cardiac catheterisation in infants and children.  Data on 205 children who underwent retrograde arterial catheterisation were studied to assess the frequency of femoral artery thrombosis and the safety and efficacy of systemic streptokinase treatment for this complication.  In 29 (14%) a transarterial balloon dilatation was performed.  In 15 (7.3%) patients impaired arterial perfusion due to vascular spasm with or without thrombus formation was seen in the cannulated leg after catheterisation.  Despite heparinisation, signs of impaired arterial circulation persisted in nine patients (4.4% of the total).  In these patients femoral artery thrombosis was strongly suspected.  Six (53%) of these had undergone a balloon dilatation.  Therefore in this study the risk of femoral artery thrombosis developing was 12 times greater after transarterial balloon dilatation than after arterial catheterisation without dilatation (20.6% v 1.7%).  Systemic infusion of streptokinase was started in all patients with femoral artery thrombosis.  Arterial perfusion became normal in all patients, though in one this was delayed.  Haematological monitoring showed lengthening of the thrombin time and a decrease of the fibrinogen concentration during streptokinase treatment.  There were no serious complications.  Systemic infusion of streptokinase is a safe and useful treatment in children with persistent femoral artery thrombosis after arterial cardiac catheterisation.
Preoperative measurement of pulmonary vascular resistance in complete transposition of the great arteries.  Transposition of the great arteries is frequently complicated by the early onset of pulmonary vascular disease.  It is difficult to measure pulmonary blood flow by the Fick principle because the pulmonary arteriovenous oxygen content difference is small and bronchial blood flow is increased in this condition.  In eight patients (mean age 7.7 years, range 3 months to 29 years) with transposition of the great arteries mass spectrometry was used to measure oxygen uptake and predict pulmonary end capillary blood oxygen content.  The effects of the bronchial circulation were studied by computer modelling.  There was close agreement between pulmonary end capillary and pulmonary vein blood oxygen contents but the resultant percentage difference in arteriovenous content difference was significant (mean (SE of difference)) (14.5(3.8)%).  The effect of the bronchial circulation was to give spuriously high estimates of pulmonary blood flow.  The error was greatest when oxygen consumption was low and aortic blood was very desaturated.
Transmural myocardial deformation in the ischemic canine left ventricle.  The myocardium is a complex three-dimensional structure consisting of myocytes interconnected by a dense collagen weave that courses in different directions.  Regional ischemia can be expected to produce complex changes in ventricular deformation.  In the present study, we examined the effects of ischemia on two- and three-dimensional finite strains during acute transmural myocardial ischemia in 13 open-chest anesthetized dogs.  In contrast to systolic deformation observed during the control period in which circumferential shortening exceeded longitudinal shortening, our results indicate that after 5 minutes of acute ischemia, end-systolic in-plane lengthening across the left ventricular wall occurs in approximately equal amounts in the circumferential and longitudinal directions.  Along with these changes in extensional strains, there were significant negative transverse shearing deformations during ischemia.  Myocardial ischemia also resulted in a loss of the normal end-systolic transmural gradients of shortening and thickening.  Three-dimensional end-diastolic strains indicate that the left ventricular wall undergoes a significant passive reconfiguration that varies transmurally with lengthening in the epicardial tangent plane and wall thinning increasing from the epicardium toward the endocardium.  The large systolic changes in shearing deformations with ischemia could potentially influence collateral blood flow and certainly indicate that uniaxial measurements of deformation in the ischemic myocardium, which do not account for shearing deformation, are incomplete and must be interpreted with caution.  Moreover, normal transmural systolic gradients in deformation, which would be anticipated on geometric grounds, are lost during ischemia, implying that the material properties of ischemic tissue or the loading conditions imposed on the ischemic region by partially impaired adjacent myocardium vary transmurally.
Protective effect of increased glycolytic substrate against systolic and diastolic dysfunction and increased coronary resistance from prolonged global underperfusion and reperfusion in isolated rabbit hearts perfused with erythrocyte suspensions.  Current therapy of myocardial infarction may include early reperfusion.  We simulated myocardial perfusion conditions during evolving myocardial infarction in isolated, normothermic, isovolumic rabbit hearts perfused with buffer containing bovine red blood cells (hematocrit of 40%), and we assessed the effects of high levels of glucose and insulin as "therapy" during prolonged (150-minute) severe underperfusion and reperfusion.  Protocol 1 consisted of underperfusion at a constant coronary perfusion pressure of 8 mm Hg.  The control group (n = 8) received 5.5 mmol/l glucose and 15 microunits/ml insulin; the group treated with high levels of glucose and insulin (G + I) (n = 8) received 19.5 mmol/l glucose and 250 microunits/ml insulin during both underperfusion and reperfusion.  Relative to the control group, the G + I group experienced 1) greater developed pressure during underperfusion and increased recovery during reperfusion, 2) preserved diastolic function during underperfusion and reperfusion, 3) lower coronary resistance and greater coronary flow during the underperfusion period, 4) increased glycolytic flux and preserved glycogen stores and high energy phosphate levels, and 5) less loss of myocyte enzymes (creatine kinase and alanine aminotransferase).  In protocol 2, coronary flow was kept identical in control (n = 8) and G + I hearts (n = 8) during the underperfusion period, and left ventricular end-diastolic pressure was kept below 10 mm Hg in both groups to minimize subendocardial damage and vascular compression.  In this protocol, the effect of the G + I intervention in the prevention of an increase in coronary resistance during the underperfusion period was distinguished from its myocellular metabolic effects; the high G + I substrate had protective effects on mechanical and metabolic function that were less marked than, but similar to, those in protocol 1, indicating that its mechanisms of protection during underperfusion affected both cardiac function and coronary resistance.  We conclude that the G + I intervention, in clinically relevant concentrations, markedly protected severely underperfused myocardium for 150 minutes and may be a beneficial intervention in combination with reperfusion therapy in acute myocardial infarction.
Effect of coronary hyperemia on Emax and oxygen consumption in blood-perfused rabbit hearts. Energetic consequences of Gregg's phenomenon.  To assess the relation between increases in contractile function and oxygen consumption (VO2) during increased coronary flow (Gregg's phenomenon), we measured the end-systolic pressure-volume relation and the relation between VO2 and left ventricular systolic pressure-volume area (PVA, a measure of total mechanical energy output) in blood-perfused, isovolumically contracting rabbit hearts during control and intracoronary adenosine infusion.  During adenosine infusion at a constant perfusion pressure (93 +/- 11 mm Hg), coronary flow increased by 99 +/- 76% (p less than 0.01), and the slope of the end-systolic pressure-volume relation, Emax (ventricular contractility index), increased by 18 +/- 15% (p less than 0.01).  When compared at the same left ventricular volume, PVA increased by 20 +/- 14% (p less than 0.01) and VO2 by 19 +/- 15% (p less than 0.01) with adenosine.  The VO2-PVA relation was linear under each condition (both median r = 0.98).  With increased coronary flow, the VO2-intercept of the VO2-PVA relation (unloaded VO2) increased by 22 +/- 18% (p less than 0.01) without a change in the slope; that is, a parallel upward shift was observed, indicating that the contractile efficiency (energy conversion efficiency of the contractile machinery) remained constant.  These increases in Emax and unloaded VO2 were not eliminated by beta-adrenergic blockade with propranolol.  We conclude that increased coronary flow with adenosine at a constant perfusion pressure augments both Emax and the nonmechanical energetic cost for excitation-contraction coupling and basal metabolism via nonadrenergic mechanisms, without changing contractile efficiency.
Spontaneous termination of reentry after one cycle or short nonsustained runs. Role of oscillations and excess dispersion of refractoriness.  This study describes factors that contribute to spontaneous termination of reentry lasting one to 10 cycles after induction by a single premature stimulus.  Reentry was studied in vitro in rings of canine atrial tissue from around the tricuspid valve orifice.  Activation was recorded from a circular array of 10 extracellular bipolar electrodes equally spaced around the ring.  In some experiments, transmembrane or monophasic action potential recordings were made near critical sites.  Termination of reentry within one cycle after induction was recorded 110 times in 11 of 35 experiments.  Important factors contributing to termination were 1) an obligatory reversal of the activation sequence that resulted in a long coupling interval in the critical region beyond the site of unidirectional block after the premature stimulus and 2) much longer refractory periods limited to this critical region, which facilitated unidirectional block but contributed to termination when this region was first activated with a short coupling interval at the end of the first reentrant cycle.  Termination of nonsustained reentry lasting longer than one cycle resulted from oscillations of conduction and refractoriness initiated by the abrupt shortening of cycle length after initiation of reentry.  Oscillations of conduction resulted from interval-dependent conduction of reentrant impulses that encountered partially refractory tissue.  For reentry to become sustained, the oscillations after induction of reentry must dampen.  Thus, damped cycle length oscillations after induction may identify clinical tachycardias caused by reentry with a partially excitable gap.
Myocardial sulfhydryl pool alterations occur during reperfusion after brief and prolonged myocardial ischemia in vivo.  Myocardial sulfhydryl (SH)-containing compounds, including reduced glutathione (GSH), are both defenses against and potential markers of reactive oxygen metabolite injury during ischemia and reperfusion.  We examined the alterations in GSH and other myocardial SH pools during reperfusion in anesthetized dogs exposed to brief (15 minutes, n = 7) or prolonged (90 minutes, n = 6) regional ischemia caused by occlusion of the left anterior descending artery.  Ninety minutes of ischemia followed by 5 hours of reperfusion, which resulted in myocardial necrosis of 43.9 +/- 4.0% of the area at risk, caused a 22% reduction in total myocardial SH groups (p less than 0.01), a 57% decrease in nonprotein myocardial SH groups (p less than 0.01), a 56% decrease in GSH (p less than 0.01), and a 62% decrease in non-GSH, nonprotein SH groups (p less than 0.02).  However, protein SH groups were not significantly reduced (12% decrease, p = NS).  Also, myocardial release of GSH and oxidized glutathione (GSSG) into the coronary venous effluent occurred during early reperfusion.  In contrast, 15 minutes of ischemia, followed by 30 minutes of reperfusion, did not alter myocardial total SH groups, protein SH groups, or GSH (9% decrease, p = NS); nor was there reperfusion release of GSH or GSSG.  However, even with brief ischemia, nonprotein SH groups decreased 23% (p less than 0.05), due mainly to a 59% decrease in the non-GSH, nonprotein SH pool (p less than 0.05).  These changes after brief ischemia occurred without alterations in myocardial GSSG or the GSH/GSSG ratio.
Accuracy of exercise electrocardiography in detecting physiologically significant coronary arterial lesions.  The accuracy of exercise electrocardiography in detecting a physiologically significant coronary artery stenosis has been assessed previously by comparing the exercise test with a coronary arteriogram.  The inherent inaccuracy of visually determined percent diameter stenosis measurements might have lead to the conclusion that the exercise electrocardiogram was less accurate than it truly was.  To determine the accuracy of the exercise electrocardiography in detecting a physiologically significant coronary stenosis, we studied 40 patients with one-vessel, one-lesion coronary artery disease, a normal resting electrocardiogram, and no hypertrophy or prior infarction.  Each patient underwent exercise electrocardiography (Bruce protocol) that was interpreted as abnormal if the ST segment developed 0.1-mV or greater depression 80 msec after the J point.  The physiological significance of each coronary stenosis was assessed by measuring of coronary flow reserve (peak divided by resting blood flow velocity) in the stenotic artery using a Doppler catheter and intracoronary papaverine (normal, 3.5 or greater peak/resting velocity).  The percent diameter and percent area stenosis produced by each lesion were determined using quantitative angiography (Brown/Dodge method).  Of the 17 patients with reduced coronary flow reserve (3.5 or greater peak/resting blood flow velocity) in the stenotic artery, 14 had an abnormal exercise electrocardiogram (sensitivity, 0.82; 95% confidence interval, 0.70-0.94).  Conversely, 20 of 23 patients with normal coronary flow reserves had normal exercise tests (specificity, 0.87; 95% confidence interval, 0.77-0.97).  The exercise electrocardiogram was abnormal in each of 11 patients with markedly reduced coronary flow reserve (less than 2.5 peak/resting velocity) and in three of six patients with moderately reduced reserve (2.5-3.4 peak/resting velocity).  The products of systolic blood pressure and heart rate at peak exercise were significantly correlated with coronary reserve in patients with truly abnormal exercise tests.  In comparison, the sensitivity (0.61; 95% confidence interval, 0.46-0.76) and specificity (0.73; 95% confidence interval, 0.60-0.86) of exercise electrocardiography in detecting a 60% or greater diameter stenosis may be significantly lower (p less than 0.05).  Exercise electrocardiography, therefore, was a good predictor of the physiological significance (assessed by coronary flow reserve) of a coronary stenosis in patients with a normal resting electrocardiogram and no hypertrophy or prior infarction.  Its value in a broader and larger patient population will require further study.  These results, however, underscore the importance of a physiological gold standard in assessing the accuracy of noninvasive studies for detecting coronary artery disease.
Secular trends in Q wave and non-Q wave acute myocardial infarction. The Minnesota Heart Survey.  The Minnesota Heart Survey examined trends of Q wave and non-Q wave acute myocardial infarction (AMI) using a 50% random sample of all hospital discharges of patients with AMI or another acute coronary disease from 35 of 36 hospitals in 1970 and 30 of 31 hospitals in 1980 in the Minneapolis-St.  Paul metropolitan area.  A total of 1,901 and 1,864 potential AMI cases were abstracted in 1970 and 1980, respectively.  Electrocardiograms were coded according to the Minnesota code.  AMIs were validated by computerized algorithm based on chest pain, enzymes, electrocardiograms, and autopsy.  This study shows that with the use of a consistent, standard diagnostic algorithm, attack rates for Q wave AMI did not change significantly between 1970 and 1980 and that attack rates for non-Q wave AMI decreased significantly during the same decade.  However, when the more sensitive cardiac enzymes creatine phosphokinase and creatine phosphokinase-MB were considered, attack rates of both Q wave and non-Q wave AMIs increased.  This research documents four important trends for community AMI rates that are at variance with those reported by others.  There was a decline in non-Q wave AMI attack rates from 1970 to 1980; women had outcomes equal to or worse than those for men for both case-fatality and 7-year survival rates; patients with non-Q wave AMIs had worse in-hospital prognoses than those with Q wave AMIs; and 7-year survival rates were worse for Q wave AMI in 1980.  These findings demonstrate the need for standard diagnostic criteria for Q wave and non-Q wave AMI if trends are to be monitored.  In the future, as new trials of operative and nonoperative therapies of AMI are undertaken, these considerations will increase in importance.
Impairment of the myocardial ultrastructure and changes of the cytoskeleton in dilated cardiomyopathy.  This study was designed to determine the morphological correlate of chronic heart failure.  Myocardial tissue from eight patients undergoing transplantation surgery because of end-stage dilated cardiomyopathy was investigated by electron microscopy and immunocytochemistry using monoclonal antibodies against elements of the cytoskeleton: desmin, tubulin, vinculin, and vimentin.  The tissue showed hypertrophy, atrophy of myocytes, and an increased amount of fibrosis.  Ultrastructural changes consisted of enlargement and varying shape of nuclei, numerous very small mitochondria, proliferation of T tubules, and accumulation of lipid droplets and glycogen.  The most obvious ultrastructural alteration was the decrease of myofilaments, ranging from rarefication to complete absence of sarcomeres in cells filled with unspecified cytoplasm.  Immunocytochemistry showed that desmin was localized at the Z lines.  In diseased myocardium, the amount of desmin was increased, but it was disorderly arranged.  Tubulin formed a fine network throughout the myocytes and was significantly increased in cardiomyopathic hearts.  Vinculin, a protein closely associated with the cytoskeleton, occurred not only at the sarcolemma and the intercalated disc but also within the myocardial cells.  Ultrastructural changes and alterations of the cytoskeleton were severe in about one third of all cells.  About one third of all cells showed moderately severe changes, and the remaining cells were normal.  Vimentin was present in the interstitial cells and was increased in relation to the increase of fibrosis.  We conclude that the increase of fibrosis, the degeneration of hypertrophied myocardial cells, and the alterations of the cytoskeleton are the morphological correlates of reduced myocardial function in chronic heart failure.
HLA class II (DR and DQ) antigen associations in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Validation study and meta-analysis of published HLA association studies   We previously reported antigen frequency differences for HLA-DR4 and HLA-DRw6 between idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (IDC) patients and healthy controls in a pilot study.  To confirm these findings, we undertook an independent study with a prospective hypothesis regarding the frequencies of DR4 and DRw6; typing for a second family of class II antigens (HLA-DQ) was included because of the proximity of the DQ loci to the DR loci and the strong linkage disequilibrium between some of the DR and DQ alleles.  Comparing a new consecutive series of IDC patients (n = 41) and healthy blood bank controls (n = 53), we confirmed an increase of DR4 antigen frequency in patients (49% versus 21%, p less than 0.005).  A trend toward decreased expression of DRw6 among patients was also noted (10% of patients versus 23% of controls).  HLA-DQw4 was significantly elevated in patients compared with controls (27% versus 6%, p less than 0.005; relative risk, 6.1; etiologic fraction, 0.22).  We identified the combined DR4-DQw4 haplotype in five of 41 Caucasian IDC patients (12%) and none of 53 controls (p less than 0.007).  A comparison of specific antigen frequencies between the preliminary and validation studies did not reveal significant differences; therefore, the data from the two studies were examined in combination.  For the combined studies, DR4 was elevated (51% versus 27% in controls, p less than 0.001), and DRw6 was decreased (9% versus 24% in controls, p less than 0.01).  The relative risk for DR4 was 2.8, and the etiologic fraction was 0.33.
Acute hemodynamic effects of captopril in children with a congestive or restrictive cardiomyopathy   The acute hemodynamic effects of captopril were evaluated at cardiac catheterization in 16 children (age, 0.3-18 years) with cardiomyopathy.  Twelve children had congestive cardiomyopathy, whereas four had restrictive cardiomyopathy.  Hemodynamic measurements were obtained 30 and 60 minutes after the oral administration of captopril (0.5 mg/kg).  Blood pressures were measured in the aorta, pulmonary artery, right atrium, and pulmonary capillary wedge position; cardiac outputs were measured by the thermodilution technique.  Hemodynamic data could not be obtained after the administration of captopril in one child with congestive cardiomyopathy because of an immediate, severe hypotensive response.  In 11 of 12 children with congestive cardiomyopathy, cardiac index increased by 22%, from 2.3 to 2.8 l/min/m2 (p less than 0.05), and stroke volume increased by 22%, from 23 to 28 ml/m2 (p less than 0.05).  Systemic vascular resistance decreased from 32 to 21 units.m2 (p less than 0.01), but the mean aortic pressure did not change significantly.  In contrast, four children with restrictive cardiomyopathy had no change in cardiac output after captopril, but there was a trend toward significant arterial hypotension (mean aortic pressure decreased from 78 to 59 mm Hg).  Thus, captopril acutely reduced systemic vascular resistance and increased both cardiac output and stroke volume in children with congestive cardiomyopathy.  In children with restrictive cardiomyopathy, however, captopril did not affect cardiac output, but it did decrease aortic pressure.  These data indicate that captopril may benefit children with a congestive cardiomyopathy but that captopril probably should not be used in children with restrictive disease.
What is the best method for assessing the long-term outcome of surgery for accessory pathways and atrioventricular junctional reentrant tachycardias?  The success of surgery for supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is evaluated by a variety of methods in different hospitals.  Unfortunately, the predictive values of these methods are not known.  We therefore compared the various methods in 261 patients undergoing surgery for SVT at Westmead Hospital since 1981.  Surgical outcome was assessed by early tests during the first week after surgery (serial 12-lead electrocardiograms, telemetric monitoring of the electrocardiogram, and electrophysiological study performed using epicardial wires); later tests at 6 months after surgery (12-lead electrocardiograms and electrophysiological study); and symptomatic review done by telephone interview at a median of 34 months after surgery.  Early tests were obtained in 97%, later tests were obtained in 76%, and symptomatic review was obtained in 98% of patients.  All of the examined tests were inaccurate methods of surgical assessment compared with the late electrophysiological study.  A large proportion of the patients proven to be surgical failures at the late electrophysiological study were not detected by early tests (83%), by later electrocardiograms (66%), or by symptomatic assessment (41%).  Accurate assessment of surgical outcome requires a late electrophysiological study to permit comparison of surgical techniques.  Late electrophysiological study also provides accurate information on the current risks and benefits of proposed surgery for communication to patients to enable them to make an informed decision on future treatment.  Most patients are willing to have a late electrophysiological study and usually benefit from clarification of their true surgical outcome.
Relation between leisure-time physical activity and blood pressure in older women.  Although there is some evidence that physical activity may decrease blood pressure in young and middle-aged women, the physical activity-blood pressure association in older women has rarely been studied.  As part of an ongoing community-based study of chronic disease, 641 Caucasian women between the ages of 50 and 89 years had blood pressure measured following the Hypertension Detection and Follow-up Program protocol.  They also answered selected Health Interview Survey questions about their leisure-time activity and were classified into categories of light (58%), moderate (24%), heavy (6%), or no physical activity (12%) by the estimated metabolic rate required for each activity.  Women who engaged in any physical activity were significantly younger and thinner than sedentary women and had lower fasting and 2-hour postchallenge insulin levels.  They did not differ in alcohol consumption, cigarette use, or prevalence of coronary heart disease or diabetes.  Rates of systolic and diastolic hypertension were significantly lower in women participating in light, moderate, or heavy physical activity compared with sedentary women.  Blood pressure levels decreased with each increase in reported activity intensity (p less than 0.005 for trend), with systolic blood pressure approximately 20 mm Hg lower in the heaviest activity group compared with systolic blood pressure in sedentary women.  Intergroup differences remained statistically significant after adjustment for age and body mass index.  Although physical activity was associated with lower fasting and 2-hour postchallenge insulin levels (p less than 0.01 for trend), adjustment for insulin levels did not alter blood pressure differences among activity groups.
Mechanisms of reoxygenation injury in cultured ventricular myocytes   To investigate factors contributing to reperfusion and reoxygenation myocardial injury, we exposed layers of cultured chick ventricular myocytes to severe hypoxia for up to 3 hours in the presence of 20 mM 2-deoxyglucose, zero glucose, and 5 mM pyruvate, and then exposed the myocytes to reoxygenation.  Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release was moderately increased during 3 hours of hypoxia but was increased markedly during reoxygenation.  Coincident changes in intracellular calcium concentration ([Ca2+]i) and cell motion were also measured during hypoxia and reoxygenation.  During hypoxia, [Ca2+]i increased to more than 1 microM, and with reoxygenation, [Ca2+]i abruptly decreased slightly but remained elevated more than 1 microM.  Cells developed a stable rigor after 30 minutes of hypoxia.  Reoxygenation caused a marked hypercontracture within 5 minutes.  Pretreatment of myocytes with either 2,3-butanedione monoxime, which inhibits Ca2(+)-dependent force development, or cyanide inhibited reoxygenation hypercontracture.  LDH release after reoxygenation was also significantly reduced in the presence of 2,3-butanedione monoxime.  Treatment of myocytes with superoxide dismutase and catalase during hypoxia also resulted in a decrease in LDH release during reoxygenation.  We conclude that an abrupt increase in [Ca2+]i during reoxygenation does not account for reoxygenation injury.  However, in the presence of elevated [Ca2+]i, reoxygenation and the resulting probable resynthesis of ATP causes [Ca2+]i-dependent myofilament crossbridge cycling, and the resulting hypercontracture contributes to myocyte damage.  The generation of oxygen free radicals after reoxygenation also appears to contribute to cell injury in this system.
A new method for quantification of regurgitant flow rate using color Doppler flow imaging of the flow convergence region proximal to a discrete orifice. An in vitro study.  While color Doppler flow mapping has yielded a quick and relatively sensitive method for visualizing the turbulent jets generated in valvular insufficiency, quantification of the degree of valvular insufficiency has been limited by the dependence of visualization of turbulent jets on hemodynamic as well as instrument-related factors.  Color Doppler flow imaging, however, does have the capability of reliably showing the spatial relations of laminar flows.  An area where flow accelerates proximal to a regurgitant orifice is commonly visualized on the left ventricular side of a mitral regurgitant orifice, especially when imaging is performed with high gain and a low pulse repetition frequency.  This area of flow convergence, where the flow stream narrows symmetrically, can be quantified because velocity and the flow cross-sectional area change in inverse proportion along streamlines centered at the orifice.  In this study, a gravity-driven constant-flow system with five sharp-edged diaphragm orifices (ranging from 2.9 to 12 mm in diameter) was imaged both parallel and perpendicular to the direction of flow through the orifice.  Color Doppler flow images were produced by zero shifting so that the abrupt change in display color occurred at different velocities.  This "aliasing boundary" with a known velocity and a measurable radial distance from the center of the orifice was used to determine an isovelocity hemisphere such that flow rate through the orifice was calculated as 2 pi r2 x Vr, where r is the radial distance from the center of the orifice to the color change and Vr is the velocity at which the color change was noted.  Using Vr values from 54 to 14 cm/sec obtained with a 3.75-MHz transducer and from 75 to 18 cm/sec obtained with a 2.5-MHz transducer, we calculated flow rates and found them to correlate with measured flow rates (r = 0.94-0.99).  The slope of the regression line was closest to unity when the lowest Vr and the correspondingly largest r were used in the calculation.  The flow rates estimated from color Doppler flow imaging could also be used in conjunction with continuous-wave Doppler measurements of the maximal velocity of flow through the orifice to calculate orifice areas (r = 0.75-0.96 correlation with measured areas).
Effects of pressure and volume of the receiving chamber on the spatial distribution of regurgitant jets as imaged by color Doppler flow mapping. An in vitro study.  Regurgitant jet dimensions imaged by color Doppler flow mapping have been used to evaluate the severity of valvular insufficiency in clinical studies.  To study the effect of pressure and volume within the receiving chamber on the magnitude of spatial distribution of regurgitant jets assessed by color Doppler techniques, we designed a simple constant-flow model in which a jet was driven through a known orifice (1.5 mm2) into a compliant receiving chamber by a steady-flow pump.  A distal tube at the outflow closed the system and maintained the volume of the chamber constant during pump operation.  We varied flow rate from 60 to 270 ml/min into elastic balloons with different static compliances of 1, 2, 4.5, and 9 ml/mm Hg (pressures of 57, 28, 18, and 8 mm Hg, respectively); the balloons served as receiving chambers at the constant volume of 150 ml.  We also evaluated the effect of different volumes of a receiving chamber (110, 130, and 150 ml and pressures of 5, 15, and 24 mm Hg) with a static compliance of 2 ml/mm Hg over the same range of flow rates.  For each of the different balloons, jet area correlated linearly with the jet velocity across the orifice (r = 0.98, 0.99, 0.98, and 0.97) and also with flow rate (r = 0.97, 0.99, 0.98, and 0.99).  At the same flow rate and volume of receiving chamber, however, the jet area imaged by color Doppler decreased as the pressure in the receiving chamber increased, although receiving-chamber volume was constant.
Changes in left ventricular volume, mass, and function during the development and regression of supraventricular tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy. Disparity between recovery of systolic versus diastolic function.  Chronic supraventricular tachycardia causes a dilated cardiomyopathy in man.  Terminating this tachycardia appears to result in symptomatic improvement; however, its effects on left ventricular (LV) volume, mass, and function have not been fully examined.  Accordingly, hemodynamic studies using simultaneous echocardiography and catheterization were performed in three groups of pigs: 1) those subjected to rapid left atrial pacing (240 beats/min) for 3 weeks (SVT, n = 8), 2) those subjected to supraventricular tachycardia for 3 weeks followed by termination of pacing and a 4-week recovery period (PSVT, n = 9), and 3) sham-operated controls (CTR, n = 10).  Systolic pump function was assessed using fractional shortening (FS), peak ejection rate [peak (-)dD/dt], and maximum rate of pressure development [peak (+)dP/dt].  Diastolic function was assessed using the time constant of isovolumic pressure decline (tau), peak early diastolic filling rate [peak (+)dD/dt], the chamber stiffness constant (Kc), and the myocardial stiffness constant (Km).  Supraventricular tachycardia caused LV dilation (end-diastolic dimension [EDD] increased from 3.5 +/- 0.4 cm in CTR to 4.9 +/- 0.5 cm in SVT, p less than 0.05) but no change in LV mass (LV weight-to-body weight ratio [LV/BW]) was 2.58 +/- 0.3 g/kg in CTR and 2.66 +/- 0.4 g/kg in SVT), all indexes of systolic function became abnormal (FS fell from 30 +/- 4% in CTR to 13 +/- 5% in SVT, p less than 0.05), and the indexes of relaxation and filling were slowed (tau increased from 36 +/- 3 msec in CTR to 51 +/- 13 msec in SVT, p less than 0.05).  There were no significant changes in Kc or Km.  After terminating the supraventricular tachycardia, LV volume fell but remained greater than that in CTR (EDD was 4.2 +/- 0.4 cm in PSVT, p less than 0.05 versus CTR) and substantial LV hypertrophy developed (LV/BW was 3.48 +/- 0.5 g/kg in PSVT, p less than 0.05 versus CTR).  Systolic function returned to normal (FS was 31 +/- 5% in PSVT) but diastolic function remained abnormal.  In PSVT, tau remained prolonged (49 +/- 12 msec, p less than 0.05 versus CTR), Kc increased from 3.7 +/- 1.0 in CTR to 7.4 +/- 1.2 (p less than 0.05), and Km increased from 4.4 +/- 1.5 in CTR to 13.9 +/- 9.7 (p less than 0.05).  Thus, the improvement in systolic function that occurs after the termination of supraventricular tachycardia is associated with the development of LV hypertrophy and persistent diastolic dysfunction.
Load dependence of left ventricular diastolic pressure-volume relations during short-term coronary artery occlusion.  We evaluated the effect of altered loading conditions on left ventricular (LV) diastolic pressure-volume relations during acute coronary artery occlusion that was produced by inflation of an intracoronary balloon.  Open-chest anesthetized dogs (n = 18) were instrumented so that LV pressure (micromanometer) and LV volume (conductance) could be measured without disturbing the pericardium.  The effects of brief periods of occlusion (1-2 minutes) were assessed under steady-state conditions before and after dextran infusion with the pericardium present and absent and during vena caval occlusion.  Under steady-state conditions before dextran infusion with the pericardium removed, at an LV end-diastolic pressure (EDP) of 8.4 +/- 1.4 mm Hg, occlusion resulted in a rightward shift in the diastolic portion of the LV pressure-volume loop (delta LVEDP, 2.7 +/- 2.3 mm Hg; delta LVEDV, 6.3 +/- 4.7 ml, both p less than 0.05 versus control).  After dextran infusion (LVEDP, 20.9 +/- 6.0 mm Hg), occlusion resulted in a rightward and upward shift in the diastolic portion of the LV pressure-volume loop (delta LVEDP, 5.8 +/- 4.4 mm Hg; delta LVEDV, 4.2 +/- 3.0 ml, both p less than 0.05 versus control).  At low cardiac volumes before dextran infusion, the intact pericardium did not affect the response to occlusion.  By contrast, after dextran infusion in the presence of an intact pericardium, LVEDP significantly increased (delta, 6.4 +/- 3.6 mm Hg, p less than 0.05) but LVDEV did not (delta, 0.7 +/- 1.5 ml, p = NS).  There was a parallel upward shift in the diastolic portion of the LV pressure-volume loop that was eliminated by removal of the pericardium.  Thus, the change in LV diastolic pressure and volume during occlusion varied and depended on the baseline cardiac volume and presence of the pericardium.  Before dextran infusion with the pericardium present and absent, coronary artery occlusion did not alter the LV diastolic chamber stiffness parameter, which was calculated from the diastolic interval of an averaged steady-state beat (0.040 +/- 0.019 versus 0.036 +/- 0.015 mm Hg/ml, p = NS).  After dextran infusion with the pericardium present and absent, coronary artery occlusion increased the LV diastolic chamber stiffness parameter (0.057 +/- 0.034 and 0.074 +/- 0.034 mm Hg/ml, both p less than 0.05 versus controls, respectively).  Vena caval occlusion eliminated the shifts in the diastolic portion of the LV pressure-volume loop with the pericardium present and absent.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
Left ventricular diastolic dysfunction limits use of maximum systolic elastance as an index of contractile function.  We tested the hypothesis that maximum systolic elastance (Emax) fails to detect a decline in left ventricular (LV) contractile function when diastolic dysfunction is present.  Canine hearts were studied in an isolated blood-perfused heart apparatus (isovolumic LV); contractile dysfunction was produced by 60 or 90 minutes of global ischemia, followed by 90 minutes of reperfusion.  Nine normal hearts underwent 60 minutes of ischemia, and five underwent 90 minutes of ischemia.  After the ischemia-reperfusion sequence, developed pressure, pressure-volume area, and myocardial ATP level were significantly less than those at baseline in all 14 hearts.  In the group undergoing 60 minutes of ischemia, LV diastolic pressure did not increase, whereas Emax decreased from 5.2 +/- 2.5 to 2.9 +/- 1.4 mm Hg/ml (p less than 0.05).  In the group undergoing 90 minutes of ischemia, diastolic pressure increased (from 10 +/- 2 to 37 +/- 20 mm Hg, p less than 0.05), and Emax did not change significantly (from 5.1 +/- 4.3 to 4.3 +/- 2.5 mm Hg/ml).  A second series of experiments was performed in 13 hearts with pressure-overload hypertrophy (aortic-band model with echocardiography and catheterization studies before the ischemia-reperfusion protocol).  Five had evidence for pump failure, whereas eight remained compensated.  After 60 minutes of ischemia and 90 minutes of reperfusion, developed pressure, pressure-volume area, and myocardial ATP level were significantly less than those at baseline in all 13 hearts.  In the group with compensated LV hypertrophy, LV diastolic pressure did not change, whereas Emax decreased from 6.9 +/- 3.0 to 3.1 +/- 2.3 mm Hg/ml (p less than 0.05).
The natural history of peripheral vascular disease. Implications for its management.  The durability and the eventual complication rate of endovascular therapy (percutaneous transluminal angioplasty, laser-assisted angioplasty, and atherectomy) are not yet entirely clear, especially with respect to the treatment of atherosclerotic lesions in the femoropopliteal or distal arterial segments.  Therefore, the indications for its use have not been firmly established and must take into consideration the natural history of the occlusive disease itself.  Although some type of procedural intervention clearly is warranted in the presence of ischemic rest pain or tissue necrosis, intermittent claudication is the only complaint in approximately 70% of patients who present with either aortoiliac or femoropopliteal involvement.  Most nondiabetic patients experience substantial symptomatic improvement with a daily exercise program, and their long-term risks for either abrupt deterioration (20-25%) or amputation (less than 10%) are relatively low.  In comparison, the 5-year mortality rate ranges from 20-40% even in claudicants, and as many as 40% of those with clinical indications of associated coronary artery disease have been shown angiographically to be candidates for myocardial revascularization.  These observations suggest that traditional indications for surgical treatment (truly disabling claudication and/or limb salvage) also should be applied to endovascular therapy until its success is confirmed beyond speculation, and that incidental coronary disease deserves particular attention in patients with lower extremity ischemia.
Impact of nonoperative therapy on the clinical management of peripheral arterial disease.  Nonoperative therapy includes conservative noninterventional modalities and the endovascular interventional modalities of percutaneous transluminal angioplasty and a variety of laser systems and atherectomy devices.  The role and impact of all nonoperative treatments are considered in the perspectives of the natural history of lower-extremity arteriosclerosis and its present surgical (operative) treatment.  Nonoperative treatments may replace and/or facilitate surgical treatment in operative candidates.  Nonoperative methods may also justify treatment in patients who cannot or should not be subjected to surgery.  Facts and opinions relating to these uses of nonoperative treatments are presented, and the qualifications and credentialing of individuals who should be treating patients with lower-extremity ischemia resulting from peripheral arteriosclerosis are discussed.
Diagnosis and evaluation of renovascular hypertension. Indications for therapy.  Renovascular hypertension is caused by two distinct conditions with different causes, fibromuscular dysplasia and atheroma.  Diagnosis of the former is both simpler and more rewarding, whereas atheromatous lesions of the renal artery may be secondary to essential hypertension.  It is therefore important to establish existence of functional renal ischemia as well as an anatomical lesion.  Universal screening of all hypertensive patients is not recommended because of the relatively low prevalence of the disease and insufficient accuracy of available screening tests.  When renovascular hypertension is clinically suspected, an oral captopril test is the most reliable office screening test.  After this, digital subtraction angiography with renal vein renins or captopril renography are appropriate steps.  However, the latter procedure, while promising, requires further evaluation.  Duplex scanning of the renal arteries also comes into this category.  Arteriography is done last, so that if renal ischemia is indicated, angioplasty can be attempted at the same time as arteriography.
Clinical and anatomical considerations for surgery in aortoiliac disease and results of surgical treatment.  A variety of surgical procedures are available for the treatment of occlusive disease involving the aorta and iliac arteries.  Use of the most appropriate operation in each patient, determined principally by disease location and patient risk, can provide highly effective relief of disabling claudication or limb-threatening ischemia with low morbidity and mortality rates.  The excellent, durable results of current surgical practice should serve as the standard with which newer treatment modalities must be compared.
Results and complications of angioplasty in aortoiliac disease   Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty was used to treat 340 aortoiliac lesions in 200 patients who were followed for as long as 90 months (mean, 28.7 months; median, 23 months).  The initial success rate was 94.7% for lesions and 93.0% for patients.  The indications for percutaneous transluminal angioplasty included claudication in 117 patients (58.5%), rest pain or ischemic night pain in 47 (23.5%), limb salvage in 33 (16.5%), and aiding in wound healing in three (1.5%).  In the series, 70% of the patients had two or more cardiovascular risk factors.  Angioplasty was initially unsuccessful in 14 patients, and 10 patients were lost to follow-up.  Follow-up was obtained in 176 patients.  The long-term results were analyzed using the life table method to determine cumulative patency.  Fourteen patients were considered failures because of recurrent disease or symptoms.  The projected 7.5-year cumulative patency rate was 85%.  When the response to redilatation was considered, the projected 7.5-year cumulative patency rate was 92%.  The results indicate that percutaneous transluminal angioplasty can successfully correct aortoiliac lesions and provide a long-term benefit for as long as 7.5 years.
Standards for evaluating results of interventional therapy for peripheral vascular disease.  Uniform standards for evaluating and reporting the results of therapeutic interventions for peripheral vascular disease are clearly needed.  They are already established for vascular surgery, as represented by several reports by SVS/ISCVS committees, but they are not always followed by vascular surgeons and have been largely ignored by other vascular interventionists.  In this article, the major problematic reporting practices are discussed and illustrated, and 14 recommendations are advanced to deal with them.  They are intended to provide precise definitions, objective criteria of success or failure, standardized severity gradation schemes for peripheral vascular disease and its risk factors, and proper procedures for reporting the outcome of all forms of therapeutic intervention.  Until these or some other agreed upon reporting standards are accepted and followed, the literature on peripheral vascular disease and its management will continue to be a source of confusion rather than enlightenment.
Clinical and anatomic considerations for surgery in femoropopliteal disease and the results of surgery.  From 1980 to 1988 we performed 288 femoropopliteal bypass operations in 231 patients at the Oregon Health Sciences University.  The indication for the procedure was claudication in 31% and the relief of limb-threatening ischemia in 64%.  Operative mortality occurred after four of these operations (1.4%), including three deaths from myocardial infarction and one death from stroke.  The femoropopliteal bypass patients were divided into groups for patency analysis, including those undergoing bypass surgery with a good quality greater saphenous vein versus alternate bypass conduits and patients undergoing primary limb bypass versus those undergoing repeat bypass after prior bypass failure.  Our overall primary graft patency for all femoropopliteal grafts was 79% at 5 years.  Patients undergoing bypass with a good quality greater saphenous vein had primary graft patency of 85% at 5 years.  Patients undergoing bypass using a conduit other than greater saphenous vein had a 5-year patency of 73%.  Patients undergoing repeat bypass after a prior failed bypass had a 5-year patency of 57%.
Femoropopliteal angioplasty. Factors influencing long-term success.  Prospective data was recorded on 217 percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) procedures performed in the superficial femoral and popliteal arteries over an 8-year period.  After the initial procedure, patients were followed with serial noninvasive studies and, in 71 patients, repeat angiography.  The mean follow-up period was 7 years (range, 2-11 years).  Standard life-table survival analysis was used to assess the factors potentially affecting long-term outcome.  Excluding an initial technical failure rate of 10%, overall patencies at 1, 3, and 5 years were 81%, 61%, and 58%, respectively.  After the first year, the prognosis (i.e., failure rate) appears to be linear over the long term (i.e., up to 10 years).  Factors negatively influencing long-term patency include the presence of diabetes mellitus, diffuse atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, or threatened limb loss.  Technical factors correlated with failure include lesion length, moderate eccentricity, and a poor post-PTA appearance.
Clinical and anatomic considerations for surgery in tibial disease and the results of surgery.  Bypass vein grafts to the infrapopliteal arteries now achieve a 5-year cumulative patency equivalent to that of vein grafts to the popliteal arteries.  The technique of in situ vein grafting to the tibial arteries is described and the results are presented.  The 5-year cumulative patency for such bypasses and the 5-year limb salvage in the same patients have both been approximately 80%.  These results coupled with those reported from other centers that have sizable experience in tibial artery reconstruction suggest that there has been real progress over the past decade in the salvage of lower extremities in patients with far advanced peripheral vascular disease through the use of autogenous venous bypass grafts.
Hot-tip laser. Results and complications.  The hot tip laser system for atheroablation has been used since mid-1984 as a device for broadening the indications for and extending the applicability of angioplasty in the management of lower-extremity atherosclerosis.  It has been a controversial device.  Although the system demonstrates that it can occasionally be useful for the management of occlusive as opposed to stenotic disease of the infrainguinal arteries, a close examination of the published data fails to demonstrate a consistent improvement in either the primary success or long-term patency rates for thermal energy applied to atheroma for recanalization of the lower extremity arteries.
Prevention of hypertension and vascular changes by captopril treatment.  Treatment of female spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and control Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats with captopril was carried out by the addition of the drug in the drinking water throughout pregnancy and lactation and after weaning.  At 28 weeks of age, average systolic blood pressure of treated SHR was 113 +/- 3 mm Hg, which was below that of control SHR (188 +/- 3 mm Hg) and WKY rats (124 +/- 3 mm Hg).  Body weight and heart rate of the SHR were not affected by the treatment.  Tissue level of catecholamines was increased by captopril treatment in the superior cervical ganglia but remained unchanged in the plasma, heart, mesenteric arteries, and the adrenal glands of both SHR and WKY rats.  Left ventricular weight, wall thickness, and internal diameter of the left ventricle in the SHR were reduced by the treatment.  Morphometric measurements of the mesenteric arteries showed that vascular alterations present in the control SHR were prevented by the treatment.  In the superior mesenteric artery and large mesenteric artery, smaller lumen size at maximal relaxation found in the control SHR was normalized to the level of the WKY rats.  Hypertrophy of the medial wall in the superior mesenteric, large and small mesenteric arteries, and an increase in the number of smooth muscle cell layers in the large mesenteric artery of the SHR were prevented by the treatment.  Perfusion study of the mesenteric vascular bed showed that reactivity of these vessels to norepinephrine was reduced, and sensitivity to norepinephrine (as determined by the effective dose that causes 50% of maximal response) was increased in the SHR by captopril treatment.  Sensitivity of the tail artery in response to norepinephrine was not altered by the treatment.  We conclude that long-term treatment with captopril of SHR before and after birth prevented the development of hypertension, structural and functional alterations of the mesenteric arteries, and cardiac hypertrophy.
Isolation of preferentially expressed genes in the kidneys of hypertensive rats.  By differential hybridization, three complementary DNAs designated as S3, S2, and SA were isolated, and the corresponding messenger RNAs (mRNAs) were differentially expressed between the kidneys of spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and normotensive Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats.  S3 is identical to cytochrome P450 IV A2.  SA encoded a protein of 546 amino acid residues, and its carboxyl terminal region had a slight homology to luciferase.  No homologous sequence has been reported in S2 sequences.  S3 mRNA was about four times more abundantly expressed in the kidneys of 28-day-old SHR than in those of age-matched WKY rats, but there was no difference at age 16 weeks.  A low NaCl diet positively modulated the expression of the S3 gene.  S2 mRNA was almost undetectable in the kidneys of 28-day-old WKY rats but was clearly detected in those of age-matched SHR.  The expression level of S2 mRNA in the livers of 16-week-old SHR was about five times higher than that of age-matched WKY rats.  The expression of S2 mRNA in the livers was modulated by dietary NaCl and captopril.  SA mRNA was more than 10 times more abundantly expressed in the kidneys of SHR than in those of WKY rats from age 4 weeks.  With the administration of captopril, the expressions of SA mRNA in the livers of SHR were positively modulated.  Because these three genes are not only differentially expressed between SHR and WKY rats but also related to sodium metabolism or blood pressure control, the identification of these genes may provide important probes to examine the mechanisms of hypertension.
Impaired insulin action on skeletal muscle metabolism in essential hypertension.  Previous studies have shown that essential hypertension is frequently associated with insulin resistance.  The tissues responsible for this metabolic alteration have not been defined.  We tested the hypothesis that skeletal muscle is the site of insulin resistance of essential hypertension with the use of the perfused forearm technique.  Eight hypertensive (age 42 +/- 3 years, body mass index 27 +/- 1 kg/m2, intra-arterial mean blood pressure 126 +/- 4 mm Hg) and seven normotensive (age 48 +/- 3 years, body mass index 26 +/- 1 kg/m2, mean blood pressure 95 +/- 4 mm Hg) male volunteers were studied.  After glucose ingestion (40 g/m2), normal glucose tolerance in the patients was maintained at the expense of a heightened plasma insulin response, suggesting the presence of insulin resistance.  During graded, local (intra-arterial) hyperinsulinemia encompassing the physiological range (12-120 milliunits/l), glucose uptake by forearm tissues was significantly (p less than 0.03) reduced in the hypertensive subjects as compared with the controls at each of five insulin steps, by 43% on the average.  In addition, forearm lactate and pyruvate release were significantly less stimulated in the hypertensive than in the normotensive group (p less than 0.01 for both), presumably as a consequence of the decreased glucose influx.  Forearm exchange of oxygen, carbon dioxide, lipid substrates (free fatty acids, glycerol, and beta-hydroxybutyrate), and potassium were similar in the hypertensive and normotensive groups in the basal state.  Insulin had no effect on oxygen consumption, carbon dioxide production, and respiratory quotient in either study group, whereas it stimulated free fatty acids, glycerol, and potassium uptake to the same extent in the hypertensive and normotensive groups.
Nicotine impairs reflex renal nerve and respiratory activity in deoxycorticosterone acetate-salt rats.  Smoking exacerbates the increase in arterial pressure in hypertension.  The effect of nicotine on the baroreceptor-mediated reflex responses of renal nerve activity (RNA), heart rate, and respiratory activity (minute diaphragmatic activity [MDA]) after bolus injections of phenylephrine was compared in deoxycorticosterone acetate (DOCA)-salt sensitive and normotensive rats.  Osmotic minipumps that dispensed either nicotine (2.4 mg/kg/day) or saline were implanted in DOCA and normotensive rats for 18 days.  Anesthetized DOCA-nicotine, DOCA-saline, control-nicotine, and control-saline rats had mean arterial pressures (MAP) of 117 +/- 3, 110 +/- 9, 90 +/- 3, and 89 +/- 5 mm Hg, respectively.  Nicotine decreased the sensitivity (p less than 0.05) of baroreceptor reflex control of RNA (% delta RNA/delta MAP) in the DOCA-nicotine rats (-0.92 +/- 0.08) compared with the DOCA-saline (-1.44 +/- 0.16), control-nicotine (-1.45 +/- 0.08), or control-saline (-1.45 +/- 0.21) rats.  The reflex decrease in respiratory activity (% delta MDA/delta MAP x 100) was impaired (p less than 0.01) in both control-nicotine (-24.5 +/- 3.3) and DOCA-nicotine (-18.2 +/- 4.6) rats compared with control-saline (-59.2 +/- 9.1) and DOCA-saline (-52.5 +/- 9.9) rats.  The reflex decrease in heart rate (absolute delta HR/delta MAP) in both DOCA-nicotine (1.56 +/- 0.17) and control-nicotine (1.54 +/- 0.24) rats was augmented compared with DOCA-saline and control-saline rats (0.91 +/- 0.12 and 0.97 +/- 0.14).
Effect of drug and diet treatment of mild hypertension on diastolic blood pressure. The TAIM Research Group.  The Trial of Antihypertensive Interventions and Management is a multicenter randomized trial designed to examine the diastolic blood pressure response of various combinations of pharmacological and dietary interventions in the treatment of mild hypertension (diastolic blood pressure 90-100 mm Hg).  Eight hundred and seventy-eight participants at 110-160% of ideal weight were randomly allocated to nine drug/diet treatment groups receiving either a placebo, chlorthalidone (25 mg), or atenolol (50 mg), combined with a usual, a weight loss, or a low sodium/high potassium diet.  The primary outcome was diastolic blood pressure change from baseline to 6 months.  Seven hundred and eighty-seven participants had follow-up data.  The mean baseline diastolic blood pressure was 93.8 mm Hg; 55.9% of the participants were male, and the weight loss diet group lost an average of 4.7 kg.  Multiple comparisons were accounted for in the analysis.  A significantly greater lowering of diastolic blood pressure (12.4 mm Hg) was achieved in the atenolol group compared with either the low sodium/high potassium diet group (7.9 mm Hg, p = 0.001) or weight loss group (8.8 mm Hg, p = 0.006).  Adding weight loss to chlorthalidone significantly enhanced blood pressure lowering (15.1 mm Hg) when compared with the diuretic alone (10.8 mm Hg, p = 0.002), but adding a low sodium/high potassium diet (12.2 mm Hg, p = 0.029) did not.  In the short-term treatment of mild hypertension where diastolic blood pressure is the sole consideration, drugs outperform diet, and weight loss is beneficial, especially with diuretics.
Characterization of auscultatory gaps with wideband external pulse recording.  Three types of auscultatory gaps, called G1, G2, and G3, that occur during blood pressure measurement have been identified by using wideband external pulse recording.  We have previously shown that the wideband external pulse recorded during cuff deflation can be separated into three components (K1, K2, and K3), one of which (K2) is closely related to the Korotkoff sound.  G1 occurs with cuff pressure just below systolic and is characterized by the presence of K1 and K2 with intermittent disappearance of K2.  G1 gaps are related to a phasic decrease of arterial (systolic) pressure and were exhibited by 13 of 60 hypertensive patients.  G2 gaps are related to a phasic increase of arterial (diastolic) pressure, occur when cuff pressure is just above diastolic, and are characterized by the presence of K1, K2, and K3 with intermittent disappearance of K2.  Seven of 60 hypertensive patients exhibited a G2 gap.  G3 gaps occur with cuff pressure between systolic and diastolic and are characterized by an underdeveloped or blunted K2 signal.  Three of 60 hypertensive patients exhibited a G3 gap.  The identification of auscultatory gaps in relation to the wideband external pulse provides a qualitative measure of their existence, can be of significant value in better understanding aspects of the auscultatory blood pressure measurement technique, and provides an objective basis with which to better understand the mechanisms that cause them.
Myocardial protein turnover in patients with coronary artery disease. Effect of branched chain amino acid infusion.  The regulation of protein metabolism in the human heart has not previously been studied.  In 10 postabsorptive patients with coronary artery disease, heart protein synthesis and degradation were estimated simultaneously from the extraction of intravenously infused L-[ring-2,6-3H]phenylalanine (PHE) and the dilution of its specific activity across the heart at isotopic steady state.  We subsequently examined the effect of branched chain amino acid (BCAA) infusion on heart protein turnover and on the myocardial balance of amino acids and branched chain ketoacids (BCKA) in these patients.  In the postabsorptive state, there was a net release of phenylalanine (arterial-cardiac venous [PHE] = -1.71 +/- 0.32 nmol/ml, P less than 0.001; balance = -116 +/- 21 nmol PHE/min, P less than 0.001), reflecting protein degradation (142 +/- 40 nmol PHE/min) in excess of synthesis (24 +/- 42 nmol PHE/min) and net myocardial protein catabolism.  During BCAA infusion, protein synthesis increased to equal the degradation rate (106 +/- 24 and 106 +/- 28 nmol PHE/min, respectively) and the phenylalanine balance shifted (P = 0.01) from negative to neutral (arterial-cardiac venous [PHE] = 0.07 +/- 0.36 nmol/ml; balance = 2 +/- 25 nmol PHE/min).  BCAA infusion stimulated the myocardial uptake of both BCAA (P less than 0.005) and their ketoacid conjugates (P less than 0.001) in proportion to their circulating concentrations.  Net uptake of the BCAA greatly exceeded that of other essential amino acids suggesting a role for BCAA and BCKA as metabolic fuels.  Plasma insulin levels, cardiac double product, coronary blood flow, and myocardial oxygen consumption were unchanged.  These results demonstrate that the myocardium of postabsorptive humans is in negative protein balance and indicate a primary anabolic effect of BCAA on the human heart.
Sclerotherapy of varicose and telangiectatic leg veins. Minimal sclerosant concentration of hypertonic saline and its relationship to vessel diameter   The author reports the results of a double-blind, paired-comparison study using saline sclerosant plus or minus heparin additive.  The study was designed to elucidate the effects of increasing concentrations of hypertonic saline with regard to vessel diameter, clinical efficacy, complications, and discomfort.  Six hundred women with bilaterally symmetrical starburst telangiectasias or varicose veins were entered into the study.  Sodium chloride 11.7% appeared to be the minimal sclerosant concentration of saline that produced the most effective vein sclerosis of vessels of less than 8 mm in diameter, while producing the least morbidity.  The optimal concentration of the sclerosant may vary with the diameter of the vessels under therapeutic consideration.
Natural history of moderate aortic stenosis.  The natural history of severe, symptomatic aortic stenosis has been well documented.  However, the natural history of moderate aortic stenosis remains poorly understood.  Therefore, a group of 66 patients was identified who had a diagnosis of moderate aortic stenosis at the time of cardiac catheterization (aortic valve area 0.7 to 1.2 cm2) and who did not have surgical therapy during the 1st 180 days after cardiac catheterization.  During a mean follow-up period of 35 months, 14 patients died of causes attributed to aortic stenosis and 21 underwent aortic valve replacement.  The estimated probability for remaining free of any complication of aortic stenosis at the end of the first 4 years was 59%.  Symptomatic patients with decreased ejection fraction or hemodynamic evidence of left ventricular decompensation were at greater risk for these complications.  It is concluded that patients with moderate aortic stenosis are at significant risk for the development of complications.
Effect of H1 receptor stimulation on coronary artery diameter in patients with variant angina: comparison with effect of acetylcholine   It has been suggested that histamine is involved in the pathogenesis of coronary spasm but its exact role remains unclear.  H1 receptor stimulation of the coronary artery was performed with a selective intracoronary infusion of histamine (2 micrograms/min) in 21 patients with variant angina after blockade of the H2 receptor with cimetidine (25 mg/kg) and its effect on the coronary artery diameter was examined.  Intracoronary injection of acetylcholine was also performed in 19 of the 21 patients.  Ergonovine (0.2 mg) was intravenously administered in one patient.  The coronary artery diameter was measured with cinevideodensitometric analysis.  A mean plasma histamine concentration in the coronary sinus increased from 4 x 10(-9) to 7 x 10(-8) M 5 min after histamine infusion into the left coronary artery (n = 18).  Coronary spasm was induced in 6 patients (29%) with histamine, in 18 (95%) with acetylcholine and in 1 with ergonovine.  The effect of histamine on the luminal diameter was analyzed at the site of spasm in the 26 coronary arteries in which spasm was induced by acetylcholine or ergonovine.  Of the 20 coronary arteries with a normal arteriogram or a fixed stenosis less than or equal to 50% of luminal diameter, histamine decreased the diameter in 4, increased it in 14 (70%) and caused no change in 2; of the 6 coronary arteries with a fixed stenosis greater than or equal to 75%, histamine decreased the diameter in 5 and increased it in 1.  In the coronary arteries in which spasm was not induced by either acetylcholine or ergonovine, histamine increased the diameter, especially in those without advanced atherosclerosis.
Percutaneous mitral valvuloplasty in surgical high risk patients.  Among 126 consecutive patients undergoing percutaneous mitral valvuloplasty, 34 were judged to be at high risk for surgery on the basis of age greater than 70 years (n = 13), New York Heart Association functional class IV (n = 11), ejection fraction less than or equal to 35% (n = 3), severe pulmonary hypertension (n = 7), need for associated coronary bypass (n = 4) or additional valve surgery (n = 20) or severe pulmonary disease (n = 3).  Baseline features of the high risk group were substantially worse than those of the other patients: age (65 +/- 11 versus 49 +/- 12 years; p = 0.0001) and echocardiographic score (9.4 +/- 1.8 versus 8.2 +/- 1.5; p = 0.005) were higher, whereas cardiac output (2.9 +/- 0.9 versus 4.1 +/- 1.2 liters/min; p = 0.0001) and mitral valve area (0.9 +/- 0.4 versus 1.1 +/- 0.3 mm2; p = 0.002) were lower.  Three high risk patients experienced technical failures and three others had major complications.  Among the remaining 28 patients, 18 (65%) had a complete hemodynamic success, 4 (14%) an incomplete success and 6 (21%) hemodynamic failure.  Stepwise logistic regression analysis retained echocardiographic score as the only factor independently predictive of success.  The percent increase in mitral valve area also correlated with echocardiographic score (r = 0.51, p less than 0.01).
The variable extent of jeopardized myocardium in patients with single vessel coronary artery disease: quantification by thallium-201 single photon emission computed tomography   To assess the extent of jeopardized myocardium in patients with single vessel coronary artery disease of variable severity and location, quantitative exercise thallium-201 single photon emission computed tomography was performed in 158 consecutive patients with angiographically proved single vessel coronary artery disease.  The extent of abnormal left ventricular perfusion was quantified from computer-generated polar maps of three-dimensional myocardial radioactivity.  Patients with only a moderate (51% to 69%) stenosis tended to have a small perfusion defect irrespective of the coronary artery involved.  Whereas a perfusion defect measuring greater than or equal to 10% of the left ventricle was found in 78% of patients with no prior infarction and severe (greater than or equal to 70%) stenosis, this was observed in only 24% of patients with moderate stenosis.  Perfusion defect size increased with increasing severity of stenosis for the entire group without infarction and for those with left anterior descending, right and circumflex coronary artery stenosis.  However, the correlation between stenosis severity and perfusion defect size was at best only modest (r = 0.38, p = 0.0001).  The left anterior descending artery was shown to be the most important of the three coronary arteries for providing left ventricular perfusion.  Proximal stenosis of this artery produced a perfusion defect approximately twice as large as that found in patients with a proximal right or circumflex artery stenosis.  However, marked heterogeneity in perfusion defect size existed among all three vessels despite comparable stenosis severity.  This was most apparent for the left anterior descending coronary artery, where mid vessel stenosis commonly produced a perfusion defect similar in size to that found in proximally stenosed vessels.
Primary angioplasty in myocardial infarction: assessment of improved myocardial perfusion with technetium-99m isonitrile.  Technetium-99m-hexakis-2-methoxy-2-isobutyl-isonitrile (technetium-99m isonitrile) is a new radiopharmaceutical compound that reflects myocardial perfusion.  Its kinetics, especially its lack of redistribution after intravenous administration, permits the assessment of changes in myocardial perfusion without delay of therapy.  Tomographic images at rest were obtained immediately and 6 to 10 days later in 17 consecutive patients undergoing successful primary angioplasty during their first transmural myocardial infarction.  Thirteen patients had anterior infarction.  The initial (acute) defect size before angioplasty of 48 +/- 17% of the left ventricle decreased significantly (p less than 0.0001) to 29 +/- 19% on the late scans.  There was no correlation between the time to therapy and the reduction in defect size.  Twelve of the 17 patients, including 7 of the 11 patients treated after 4 h, demonstrated a definite reduction in the initial defect size.  Eight patients with angiographically proved persistent coronary occlusion underwent a similar imaging sequence.  The initial defect size in this group remained unchanged on the late scans (24 +/- 16% versus 26 +/- 18%, p = NS).  Primary angioplasty is an effective approach toward salvaging myocardium; comparison with thrombolytic drug therapy must await the results of controlled clinical trials.
Differentiating cardiomyopathy of coronary artery disease from nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy utilizing positron emission tomography.  To determine if imaging of blood flow (using N-13 ammonia) and glucose metabolism (using F-18 2-deoxyglucose) with positron emission tomography can distinguish cardiomyopathy of coronary artery disease from nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy, 21 patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction who were evaluated for cardiac transplantation were studied.  The origin of left ventricular dysfunction had been previously determined by coronary angiography to be ischemic (11 patients) or nonischemic (10 patients).  Images were visually analyzed by three observers on a graded scale in seven left ventricular segments and revealed fewer defects in dilated cardiomyopathy compared with ischemic cardiomyopathy for N-13 ammonia (2.7 +/- 1.6 versus 5 +/- 0.6; p less than 0.03) and F-18 deoxyglucose (2.8 +/- 2.1 versus 4.6 +/- 1.1; p less than 0.03).  An index incorporating extent and severity of defects revealed more homogeneity with fewer and less severe defects in subjects with nonischemic than in those with ischemic cardiomyopathy as assessed by imaging of flow (2.8 +/- 1.8 versus 9.2 +/- 3; p less than 0.001) and metabolism (3.8 +/- 3.3 versus 8.5 +/- 3.6; p less than 0.005).  Diagnostic accuracy for distinguishing the two subgroups by visual image analysis was 85%.  Using previously published circumferential count profile criteria, patients with dilated cardiomyopathy had fewer ischemic segments (0.4 +/- 0.8 versus 2.5 +/- 2 per patient; p less than 0.01) and infarcted segments (0.1 +/- 0.3 versus 2.4 +/- 1.4 per patient; p less than 0.001) than did patients with cardiomyopathy of coronary artery disease.  The sensitivity for differentiating the two clinical subgroups using circumferential profile analysis was 100% and the specificity 80%.  An index incorporating both number and severity of defects derived from circumferential profile analysis was significantly lower in subjects with dilated cardiomyopathy than in ischemic cardiomyopathy (0.3 +/- 0.8 versus 2.7 +/- 2.4; p less than 0.005).  Thus, noninvasive positron emission tomographic imaging with N-13 ammonia and F-18 deoxyglucose is helpful in distinguishing patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction secondary to coronary artery disease from those with nonischemic cardiomyopathy, and a semiquantitative index such as circumferential profile analysis is superior to that of visual analysis alone.
Comparison of pre- and postoperative conduction patterns in patients surgically cured of atrioventricular node reentrant tachycardia.  Patients with atrioventricular (AV) node reentrant tachycardia characteristically have short and constant retrograde His-atrium conduction times (H2A2 intervals) during the introduction of ventricular extrastimuli.  It has therefore been suggested that the tachycardia circuit involves retrograde conduction up an accessory pathway located in perinodal tissue.  If the mechanism of surgical cure of AV node reentrant tachycardia is interruption of this accessory pathway, postoperative changes in retrograde conduction would be expected.  Thirteen patients with drug-refractory AV node reentrant tachycardia underwent surgery.  Preoperatively, H2A2 intervals were short and constant.  During AV node reentrant tachycardia, earliest atrial activation was seen near the His bundle and was 0 to 25 ms before ventricular activation in all patients except one.  Surgery consisted of dissection of right atrial septal and anterior inputs to the AV node and central fibrous body.  Postoperatively, the H2A2 interval remained short and constant compared with preoperative values although it was slightly prolonged (74 +/- 18 versus 61 +/- 21 ms, p less than 0.005).  Twelve of the 13 patients are free of tachycardia after 28 +/- 13 months and no patient has had evidence of AV node block.  Thus, surgical cure of AV node reentrant tachycardia is highly successful; however, there is no reason to postulate an accessory pathway or use of perinodal tissue as part of the tachycardia circuit and the mechanism of surgical success remains obscure.
Prolonged and fractionated right atrial electrograms during sinus rhythm in patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and sick sinus node syndrome.  Intraatrial catheter mapping of the right atrium was performed during sinus rhythm in 92 patients: Group I = 43 control patients without paroxysmal atrial fibrillation or sick sinus node syndrome; Group II = 31 patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation but without sick sinus node syndrome; and Group III = 18 patients with both paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and sick sinus node syndrome.  Atrial electrograms were recorded at 12 sites in the right atrium.  The duration and number of fragmented deflections of the atrial electrograms were quantitatively measured.  The mean duration and number of fragmented deflections of the 516 atrial electrograms in Group I were 74 +/- 11 ms and 3.9 +/- 1.3, respectively.  The criteria for an abnormal atrial electrogram were defined as a duration of greater than or equal to 100 ms or eight or more fragmented deflections, or both.  Abnormal atrial electrograms were observed in 10 patients (23.3%) in Group I, 21 patients (67.7%) in Group II and 15 patients (83.3%) in Group III (Group II versus Group I, p less than 0.001; Group III versus Group I, p less than 0.001).  The mean number of abnormal electrograms per patient with an abnormal electrogram was 1.3 +/- 0.7 in Group I, 2.5 +/- 1.9 in Group II and 3.5 +/- 2.5 in Group III (Group I versus Group II, p less than 0.01; Group II versus Group III, p less than 0.05).  A prolonged and fractionated atrial electrogram characteristic of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation can be closely related to the vulnerability of the atrial muscle.
Spontaneous changes in ventricular tachycardia cycle length.  Understanding spontaneous fluctuations in ventricular tachycardia cycle length is required to develop algorithms for ventricular tachycardia detection and termination.  Variations in cycle length, time to stable cycle length and the range of RR intervals during ventricular tachycardia were analyzed in 74 episodes of sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia induced in patients not taking antiarrhythmic medication.  Linear regression demonstrated cycle length variability to decrease over time (41 +/- 24 to 17 +/- 19 ms, p less than 0.001).  Slower ventricular tachycardia had more cycle length variability than faster ventricular tachycardia (p less than 0.001).  Ventricular tachycardia that was initially more variable tended to remain more variable (p less than 0.001).  Fifty-four percent of episodes stabilized within the first 15 beats, 75% by 30 beats and 93% by 50 beats.  The number of beats to stable cycle length was independent of ventricular tachycardia rate.  The average range in cycle length per episode was 127 +/- 72 ms; 12% of ventricular tachycardia episodes varied by less than 50 ms and 45% by less than 150 ms.  The maximal range in RR intervals from a single episode of ventricular tachycardia was 290 ms.  Therefore, ventricular tachycardia demonstrates a wide range of cycle lengths and has time-dependent changes in variability and stability.  These cycle length changes should be considered in the algorithms for ventricular tachycardia detection and termination by automatic antitachycardia devices.
Echocardiographic evaluation of cardiac structure and function in elderly subjects with isolated systolic hypertension   One hundred four participants in the Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program (SHEP) trial (mean age 71 +/- 6 years) were examined by Doppler echocardiography to gain information on the cardiac structural and functional alterations in isolated systolic hypertension.  Participants had a systolic blood pressure greater than 160 mm Hg with diastolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg and were compared with 55 age-matched normotensive control subjects.  Left ventricular mass index was significantly higher in the participants than in the normotensive subjects (103 +/- 28 versus 87 +/- 23 g/m2, p = 0.0014) and 26% of the participants met echocardiographic criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy compared with 10% of normotensive subjects.  Left atrial index was also greater in participants than in normotensive subjects (2.26 +/- 0.32 versus 2.11 +/- 0.24 cm/m2, p = 0.005) and 51% of participants had left atrial enlargement.  Doppler measures of diastolic filling were significantly different between the two groups, with peak atrial velocity higher (76 +/- 17 versus 69 +/- 17 cm/s, p = 0.02) and ratio of peak early to atrial velocity lower (0.76 +/- 0.23 versus 0.86 +/- 0.22, p = 0.0124) in participants.  There was no correlation between left ventricular mass index and Doppler measures of diastolic function, but relative wall thickness correlated significantly with peak atrial velocity (r = 0.22, p = 0.016) and peak early to peak atrial velocity ratio (r = 0.24, p = 0.007).  There was no difference in M-mode ejection phase indexes of systolic performance (shortening fraction and peak velocity of circumferential fiber shortening) between the two groups.
Immunosuppressive therapy in the management of acute myocarditis in children: a clinical trial.  To assess whether steroid therapy influenced the clinical course of myocarditis in a pediatric population, findings in 13 consecutive infants and children (8 female, 5 male) with biopsy-proved myocarditis were reviewed.  The mean age was 5.7 +/- 4.8 years (range 1.1 to 14.8).  Congestive heart failure was present in all as were ST-T wave changes, cardiomegaly and pulmonary edema on chest roentgenogram.  Echocardiography demonstrated pericardial effusion in five patients and mitral regurgitation in eight.  Mean left ventricular ejection fraction was 34 +/- 12%.  Prednisone was administered to all patients; one patient also received azathioprine.  There was one death.  All survivors showed clinical improvement with normalization of ECG changes, heart size and systolic function.  No significant side effects occurred.  Repeat myocardial biopsy in eight patients demonstrated improvement in all eight and elimination of the inflammatory infiltrate in six.  Immunosuppressive therapy in this pediatric population appeared useful in improving the clinical course and cardiac function in acute myocarditis with no adverse side effects.
Effect of atenolol and diltiazem on heart period variability in normal persons.  Several time and frequency domain measures of heart period variability are reduced 1 to 2 weeks after myocardial infarction, and a reduced standard deviation of normal RR intervals over a 24 h period (SDNN) is associated with increased mortality.  The predictive accuracy of heart period variability may be reduced by drugs used to treat patients after myocardial infarction.  Accordingly, a randomized, three period, placebo-controlled, crossover (Latin square) design was used to determine the effect of atenolol and diltiazem on time and frequency measures of heart period variability calculated from 24 h continuous electrocardiographic recordings during treatment with atenolol, diltiazem and placebo in 18 normal volunteers.  During atenolol treatment, the 24 h average normal RR (NN) interval increased 24% (p less than 0.001).  The three measures of tonic vagal activity were significantly increased (p less than 0.001) during atenolol treatment: percent of successive normal RR intervals greater than 50 ms = 69%, root mean square successive difference of normal RR intervals = 61% and high frequency power in the heart period power spectrum = 84%.  Low frequency power also increased 45% (p less than 0.01), indicating that this variable also is an indicator of tonic vagal activity over 24 h.  Diltiazem had no significant effect on the 24 h average NN interval or on any measure of heart period variability.  The decreased mortality rate after myocardial infarction associated with beta-adrenergic blocker but not calcium channel blocker therapy may be attributed in part to an increase in vagal tone caused by beta-blockers.
Hypertrophy, fibrosis and diastolic dysfunction in early canine experimental hypertension.  To examine the relations among hypertrophy, fibrosis and diastolic performance in early experimental hypertension, 18 control dogs and 12 dogs with experimental left ventricular hypertrophy were studied.  Diastolic function was impaired in dogs with left ventricular hypertrophy, with decreased Doppler early to atrial inflow velocity ratio (E/A) (1.35 versus 1.72), increased atrial filling fraction (35% versus 29%), decreased sonomicrometric peak rates of wall thinning (-2.01 versus -3.37 liters/s) and filling (4.33 versus 6.64 liters/s) and prolonged time constant of isovolumetric relaxation (tau; 34.3 versus 28.1 ms).  Neither chamber stiffness (k; P = AekV) nor passive elastic stiffness (E; E = k sigma, where sigma = stress) was increased.  At postmortem examination, the hypertensive left ventricle weighed significantly more than normal (116 versus 80 g; p less than 0.01) and had greater muscle fiber diameter at endocardial and epicardial sampling sites in the apical free wall, basal free wall and septum (mean diameter 50 +/- 8 microns in hypertensive dogs, 37 +/- 8 microns in normal dogs; p less than 0.01).  In contrast, neither percent fibrosis (1.2 +/- 0.8 versus 0.9 +/- 0.6 in normal dogs) nor fibrotic volume (1.21 +/- 0.63 versus 0.72 +/- 0.42%/g in normal dogs) was significantly increased.  Peak volumetric filling rate was inversely related to fiber diameter (r = -0.74, p less than 0.001), although no variable of left ventricular function was significantly related to percent or volume fibrosis (all r less than 0.60, all p greater than 0.05).  Thus, diastolic dysfunction may exist in the setting of hypertrophy without significant fibrosis.  Increased myocyte size was associated with early diastolic filling abnormalities characteristic of the hypertensive left ventricle.  Fibrosis appears to be a less important determinant of diastolic performance.
Transesophageal echocardiography is superior to transthoracic echocardiography in the diagnosis of sinus venosus atrial septal defect.  The purpose of this study was to compare transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography in the diagnosis of various types of atrial septal defects.  Forty-one adult patients with the clinical diagnosis of atrial septal defect were studied by transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography (30 women, 11 men; 18 to 81 years of age).  Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated the atrial septal defect in 33 patients (secundum type in 28, primum type in 3 and sinus venosus type in 2).  Transesophageal echocardiography demonstrated the defect in all 41 patients.  Thus, in 8 (20%) of 41 patients the atrial septal defect was demonstrated by transesophageal and not by transthoracic echocardiography.  Six of the eight had a sinus venosus type atrial septal defect; the other two patients had a secundum atrial septal defect (one of these two had a technically poor transthoracic echocardiogram and the other had a small atrial septal defect).  Transthoracic echocardiography, therefore, failed to demonstrate the sinus venosus defect in six (75%) of eight patients.  An anomalous venous connection associated with the sinus venosus defect was visualized by transesophageal echocardiography in seven of the eight patients but was not seen on transthoracic echocardiography in any patient.  Sinus venosus type atrial septal defects are frequently not visualized in adults by conventional transthoracic echocardiography.  Transesophageal echocardiography is recommended when an atrial septal defect is clinically suspected but cannot be visualized by transthoracic echocardiography.
Physicians' perspectives on cholesterol and heart disease.  In early spring of 1988, questionnaires were mailed to 4,000 Midwestern physicians to survey their attitudes and practices regarding elevated serum cholesterol and their use of referrals for nutrition counseling; 633 physicians responded.  Sixty-eight percent of the physicians thought that reducing high serum cholesterol levels would substantially affect heart disease; however, physicians attributed considerably less preventive value to reducing the cholesterol level than to reducing blood pressure (80.3%) or ceasing smoking (90.0%).  The range of serum cholesterol for which diet therapy was most frequently initiated was 5.70 to 6.20 mmol/L.  The most frequent range for initiation of drug therapy was 7.80 to 8.25 mmol/L.  The physicians reported that although their medical school training did not prepare them adequately for providing diet counseling, they did feel prepared to provide, and were successful in, counseling on diet modifications for reducing serum cholesterol.  Few (10%) of the total sample reported having registered dietitians available for dietary counseling, and most (88.8%) believed that it is the physician's responsibility to provide such counseling.  Although the low response rate limits the conclusions of the survey, it is likely that those physicians most interested in the topic responded.  We conclude that registered dietitians should explore the need for their special services further.  More aggressive marketing of dietetic services could benefit both physicians and patients in the campaign to reduce serum cholesterol.
Influence of dietary cod liver oil on fatty acid composition of plasma lipids in human male subjects after myocardial infarction.  A randomized crossover study was carried out to investigate the fatty acid profile and concentrations of plasma lipids in male patients with myocardial infarction (MI) who supplemented their diet with 20 ml cod liver oil daily for 6 weeks.  Subjects were divided into two groups, A and B.  Group A received cod liver oil daily for 6 weeks after hospital discharge, but none for the subsequent 6 weeks.  Group B did not start taking cod liver oil until 6 weeks after hospital discharge, and they then took cod liver oil for 6 weeks.  Diet, medication or smoking habits were kept as constant as possible during the study.  During the period of cod liver oil intake, eicosapentaenoic acid (20:5 (n-3), EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (22:6 (n-3), DHA) increased significantly in phospholipids (PL), triglycerides (TG) and cholesterol esters (CE), whereas linoleic acid (18:2 (n-6), LA), dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid (20:3 (n-6), DHGLA) and arachidonic acid (20:4 (n-6), AA) were significantly decreased in phospholipids.  The plasma level of TG was significantly decreased during the cod liver oil intake.  Total cholesterol, high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, and levels of apolipoproteins A1 and B were not affected by cod liver oil in these MI patients.
Atrioventricular plane displacement in severe congestive heart failure following dilated cardiomyopathy or myocardial infarction.  Echocardiographic recording of the atrioventricular (AV) plane displacement during the cardiac cycle was used to assess left ventricular (LV) global function in patients with congestive heart failure (CHF).  The study population consisted of 70 patients with chronic CHF (NYHA functional groups III and IV) following dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) or myocardial infarction (MI), and 35 age-matched healthy subjects.  The AV plane displacement was recorded from the apical 4- and 2-chamber views at four LV sites located about 90 degrees apart and representing the septal, anterior, lateral and posterior parts of the LV wall.  A mean value was calculated from the above sites (AV-mean).  Patients with CHF showed a significant generalized reduction of AV plane displacement compared to healthy subjects (5.6 mm vs.  14.5 mm, P less than 0.001).  Thirty CHF patients also underwent radionuclide angiography in order to determine the ejection fraction (EF).  The correlation between AV-mean and EF was good (r = 0.82, P less than 0.001).  The selection of an AV-mean of less than 7 mm to define a severely depressed LV function (EF less than 30%) gave a sensitivity of 92% and a specificity of 67%.  It is concluded that the AV plane displacement can be used to estimate LV systolic function in patients with CHF.
Elevation of plasma neuropeptide Y-like immunoreactivity and noradrenaline during myocardial ischaemia in man.  Plasma levels of neuropeptide Y-like immunoreactivity (NPY-LI) and noradrenaline were studied for 25 h in 22 patients with acute ischaemic heart disease.  On admission, NPY-LI levels were above normal in 16 patients, and 20 patients had increased noradrenaline levels.  The initial plasma NPY-LI did not differ between patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and angina pectoris.  Initial plasma noradrenaline levels were higher in patients with AMI than in those with angina pectoris.  Plasma levels of noradrenaline remained elevated in AMI patients, but decreased towards normal values in patients with angina pectoris.  Levels of NPY-LI returned to normal within 25 h in all patients.  Tachycardia and left ventricular failure were related to high NPY-LI and noradrenaline levels.  A positive correlation was found between noradrenaline and NPY-LI in plasma.  It is suggested that neuropeptide Y (NPY), an endogenous vasoconstrictor peptide, should be considered as one of the mediators involved in the cardiovascular response to sympathetic activation induced by myocardial ischaemia.
Unnecessary deaths from valvular aortic stenosis.  The annual mortality from aortic valvular stenosis was calculated among potential candidates for surgical replacement of the aortic valve.  From the Swedish Central Register of Causes of Death, 70 patients below the age of 80 years who had died from aortic stenosis during a 1-year period in the County of Stockholm (population 1.5 million), were identified.  A retrospective analysis of their medical records showed that 37 individuals were suitable candidates for surgery.  The presence of aortic stenosis had been verified at autopsy in 31 (84%) patients.  The remaining six patients (16%) had their aortic stenosis diagnosis established by a thorough non-invasive investigation performed before death.  Although typical signs and symptoms of aortic stenosis were recorded in all 37 patients, only six (16%) of them had been considered by their physicians to be suitable candidates for surgery prior to death.  The deceased patients were compared with a group of 68 patients who had undergone aortic valve replacement for aortic stenosis during the same period.  There were no significant differences between the two groups with regard to symptoms and clinical findings, except for a higher incidence of syncope in the operated group.  It is concluded that, of 105 (68 surgically treated and 37 deceased) eligible patients with aortic stenosis, 37 individuals did not receive surgical care in time.  The reason for this was probably insufficient knowledge of the curability of the disease.
High urinary cAMP in hypertensives despite careful drug treatment--an epidemiological study from the Dalby population.  The correlation between serum calcium (S-Ca), plasma parathyroid hormone (P-PTH) and hypertension was determined in a population-based, cross-sectional study of carefully treated hypertensives (n = 391; diastolic blood pressure 90.2 mmHg; 57 years) compared with normotensive controls (n = 328; diastolic blood pressure 82.1 mmHg; 57 years).  Levels of urinary cyclic-adenosinemonophosphate (U-cAMP), but not of plasma cAMP (P-cAMP), were higher (P less than 0.001) in hypertensives than in controls.  This was the case regardless of the type of drug treatment and the blood pressure level that was reached.  U-cAMP correlated with adrenaline in multivariate analyses.  S-Ca levels were higher (P less than 0.001) and S-Mg levels were lower (P less than 0.001) in hypertensives than in controls.  This was not explained by thiazide treatment.  Thus, despite 'adequate' blood pressure reduction, substantial differences in S-Ca, S-Mg and U-cAMP still exist between hypertensives and normotensive controls.
Increased whole blood viscosity combined with decreased erythrocyte fluidity in untreated patients with essential hypertension.  Erythrocyte fluidity and other haemorheological variables were studied in 22 patients with essential hypertension and compared with age- and sex-matched healthy controls.  Hypertensive patients displayed a significantly lower erythrocyte fluidity (P less than 0.001).  Similarly, significantly elevated values for haematocrit, plasma and whole blood viscosity, as well as aggregation tendency were observed compared to controls.  Although differing in these respects from controls, there were no obvious relationships between these rheological variables and either systolic or diastolic blood pressure.  The significantly lower erythrocyte fluidity and other changes in haemorheological variables of red blood cells found in hypertensive patients may be explained by an enlarged metabolic pool of free calcium ions in these red blood cells.  It is suggested that the molecular mechanisms underlying the evolution of essential hypertension are multifactorial rather than being based on a single molecular derangement.  Primary events resulting in altered physicochemical properties of the red blood cells may work in concert in the development of essential hypertension, in addition to the increased availability of calcium ions and their potential role in smooth muscle contraction.
Assessment of myocardial perfusion in patients after the arterial switch operation.  In 21 patients who had undergone the arterial switch operation, the adequacy of myocardial perfusion was evaluated by thallium-201 computed scintigraphy 2.6 +/- 2 (0.3-7) yr after surgery.  Fourteen patients had undergone the arterial switch procedure after pulmonary artery banding and seven as a primary repair.  Isoproterenol stress increased the heart rate by at least 55%.  Tomographic imaging was performed at peak stress and 3 hr later in the reperfusion phase.  Nine patients had perfusion defects.  The perfusion defects were located at the left ventricular apex in four (with extension to the inferolateral wall in one), left ventricular anterolateral wall in two, ventricular septum in one, left ventricular inferior wall in one, and right ventricular free wall in one.  Some of these defects could be due to myocardial damage at the time of surgery, but these results also raise concern about long-term adequacy of myocardial perfusion following the arterial switch procedure.
Myocardial uptake of carbon-11-acetate as an indirect estimate of regional myocardial blood flow.  The rate of clearance of myocardial carbon-11 (11C) activity (after the administration of 11C-acetate) has been shown to correlate closely with myocardial oxygen consumption.  In the present study, we hypothesized that regional net myocardial uptake of 11C-acetate, which reflects primarily delivery and extraction of tracer, would be markedly flow-dependent and potentially useful as an indirect index of regional myocardial blood flow.  In 22 patients with stable coronary artery disease, the regional distribution of early net uptake of 11C-acetate was correlated with estimates of regional myocardial blood flow assessed with oxygen-15-water.  The myocardial images of 11C-acetate uptake were of high quality.  The correlation between the two approaches was close (r = 0.88) and not affected by the metabolic state of the tissue.  Thus, in patients with stable coronary artery disease, under resting conditions, direct estimates of myocardial oxygen consumption in relation to the level of delivery of tracer to the tissue can now be obtained by PET with use of a single radiopharmaceutical, 11C-acetate.  This approach may prove particularly useful in streamlining clinical protocols designed to assess myocardial oxygen consumption.
Blood-pool radionuclide angiography in patients with a Novacor left ventricular assist device.  Blood-pool radionuclide angiography was used to investigate the left ventricular function in eight patients who received a Novacor assist device as a bridge-to-cardiac transplantation.  Studies were performed during maximal and minimal tolerated assist device flows.  The left ventricular ejection fraction, volumes, cardiac output, and the pump ejection fraction were computer-assessed.  All patients had severe left ventricular dilation and hypokinesis before insertion of the assist device, with a mean ejection fraction of 18% +/- 4% which improved to 44% +/- 18% (p less than 0.01) during maximal assist device flows, but fell to 25% +/- 15% (p less than 0.01) during minimal flows.  The ventricular volumes became normal at maximal assist device flow but increased significantly (p less than 0.05) during minimal flow.  The pump was well visualized and had an ejection fraction of 82% +/- 7%.  These data indicate that this assist device effectively unloads the left ventricle.  The deterioration in ejection fraction following decrease in assist device flow is in keeping with the dependency of these patients on the device to sustain adequate hemodynamics.
Early scintigraphic detection of experimental myocardial infarction in dogs with technetium-99m-glucaric acid   Recent data have generated some interest in technetium-99m-(99mTc) glucaric acid as an in vivo viability marker.  We studied 99mTc-glucaric acid retention in canine models of myocardial ischemia (20-min occlusion of the LAD/40-min reperfusion), acute myocardial infarction (MI) (90-min LAD occlusion/3-hr reperfusion), and chronic MI (90-min occlusion and either 48-hr or 10-day reperfusion).  Regional myocardial blood flow was measured by radiolabeled microspheres.  No preferential uptake of glucaric acid was observed in ischemic but viable myocardium.  The compound showed high affinity for necrotic myocardial tissue for several days following injury.  The preferential uptake in infarcted tissue disappeared by 10 days following injury.  This study shows that 99mTc-glucaric acid acts exclusively as a marker of necrosis in canine models of MI.  Technetium-99m-glucaric acid may have clinical utility in early cardiac imaging of myocardial infarction and in differentiating recent from old injuries.
Effect of coronary occlusion and myocardial viability on myocardial activity of technetium-99m-sestamibi   The timing effect of sestamibi administration with respect to the onset of myocardial ischemia and reperfusion was studied in swine.  In different groups of animals sestamibi was administered prior to coronary artery occlusion, during occlusion, or 1/2 hour following reperfusion.  Sestamibi administered prior to coronary occlusion resulted in an insignificant decrease in 99mTc activity in the ischemic zone.  However, infarct zone activity was reduced to 62 +/- 14% of the nonischemic zone.  In contrast, administration during coronary occlusion resulted in similar significant reductions of both ischemic and infarct zone activity.  Administration of sestamibi during reperfusion resulted in normal ischemic zone activity and markedly reduced activity in the infarct zone.  Significantly reduced activity in the infarct zone was found to be independent of the timing of sestamibi administration with respect to the onset of myocardial ischemia and/or reperfusion.  Thus, cell viability appears required for uptake and retention of isotope activity.
The management of primary pulmonary hypertension.  Primary pulmonary hypertension is a clinical syndrome characterized by pulmonary hypertension in the absence of sufficient underlying cardiac, parenchymal pulmonary, or systemic disease to account for it.  The population of patients with primary pulmonary hypertension is a heterogeneous one, both clinically and histologically.  As the etiologic mechanisms are unknown, therapy is directed toward the consequences of the pulmonary vascular process.  Oxygen supplementation, the use of digoxin and diuretics for symptomatic heart failure, and anticoagulation all may have a role in treating primary pulmonary hypertension, although vasodilator therapy has been the main area of investigation.  Screening for vasodilator responsiveness, defining a favorable vasodilator effect, predicting long-term effectiveness, and deciding who to treat have all been controversial.  New approaches, such as use of high-dose calcium channel-blocking agents and continuous intravenous infusion of prostacyclin (an investigational agent), have recently been proposed.  When medical therapies are exhausted, heart-lung or lung transplantation has increasingly become an option for selected patients.
Thromboexclusion of the right ventricle in children with pulmonary atresia and intact ventricular septum.  Twelve children with pulmonary atresia and intact ventricular septum underwent closure of the tricuspid valve as a part of a new surgical procedure.  In two cases a concomitant Fontan operation was performed.  In each patient the right ventricle was very small and right ventricular pressure was higher than systemic pressure.  Ventricle-coronary connections provided flow of desaturated blood from the right ventricle into the coronary arteries in 11 of 12 cases.  Five of the 12 children did not survive operation and postmortem examination of each revealed severe acute and chronic myocardial ischemic damage and high-grade obstruction or interruption of the proximal left anterior descending coronary artery.  Preoperative angiography demonstrated occlusive changes in the coronary arteries, resulting in right ventricular dependent circulation, in all five children who died and in one child who survived operation.  Seven children who survived operation are well 4 months to 3.5 years later.  Two have undergone subsequent successful Fontan operation and two others are considered suitable candidates for this operation.  Tricuspid valve closure is recommended for a carefully selected group of infants with pulmonary atresia and intact ventricular septum provided a right ventricular-dependent coronary circulation can be excluded on the basis of preoperative coronary cineangiography.
Left ventricular mechanics of ejecting, postischemic hearts during left ventricular circulatory assistance.  We measured the effects of left ventricular circulatory assistance on ventricular mechanics of ejecting sheep hearts before and after global ischemia.  Flows from left atrium to femoral artery ranged between 20 and 100 ml/kg/min during circulatory assistance.  In preischemic, ejecting hearts increasing flow through the left ventricular assist device progressively decreased stroke volume, end-diastolic volume, and circumferential systolic wall stress, but only slightly decreased end-systolic volume.  In postischemic, ejecting hearts left ventricular assistance progressively and substantially decreased both end-diastolic volume and end-systolic volume; at high flows, end-systolic volume returned to the normal range of preischemic hearts.  High flows through the assist device also shifted end-systolic points of pressure-volume loops leftward and increased the stroke work/end-diastolic volume ratio in ejecting postischemic hearts; these observations raise the possibility that left ventricular circulatory assistance acutely improves myocardial contractility of postischemic hearts.
Evolution of human cardiac myocyte dimension during prolonged mechanical support.  In animal models using left ventricular assist systems over long time periods, myocardial cellular atrophy has been reported, raising concern that prolonged clinical use of such systems might lead to deterioration in left ventricular function.  At the University of Pittsburgh, long-term clinical use of the Novacor (Baxter Healthcare Corp., Novacor Div., Oakland, Calif.) left ventricular support system for patients awaiting heart transplants has allowed study of the effects of long-term mechanical support on human subjects.  This study determined that cardiac myocyte dimension is initially greater in patients with end-stage cardiac disease who require support rather than in patients with the same disease who do not require such support.  Although myocyte dimension does decrease within a few days of the inception of support, this decrease merely brings cell size closer to the values usual in patients with chronic end-stage cardiac disease, and no further shrinkage is observed.  Thus the Novacor left ventricular assist system does not appear associated with left ventricular atrophy, and its long-term use may not be detrimental to left ventricular function.
Cerebral air embolism treated by pressure and hyperbaric oxygen.  We used pressure and hyperbaric oxygen to treat 2 patients with cerebral air embolism, occurring as the result of invasive medical procedures, and neither suffered any permanent damage detectable by clinical examination and MRI.  This outcome contrasts with reports of infarct and disability among untreated victims of air embolism.
Abdominal aneurysms in childhood: report of a case and review of the literature.  Abdominal aneurysms are rare in children and are usually found in association with congenital cardiac or aortic malformations, connective tissue disorders, trauma, or previous arterial catheter placement.  A 4-year-old girl who had a common iliac artery aneurysm, who had no history of arterial catheter placement or trauma, and who had no evidence of Marfan's or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, arteritis, coarctation of the aorta, or other diseases associated with childhood aneurysms is presented.  Resection of the aneurysm and arterial reconstruction were performed without the use of prosthetic material or vein graft.  Pathologic examination showed no evidence of inflammation or medial degeneration in any of the layers of the arterial wall.  This is the fourth report found in the literature of documented idiopathic abdominal aneurysm in a child.  The conditions associated with abdominal aneurysms in childhood are discussed, and the literature is reviewed.
Reduction of cardiovascular disease-related mortality among postmenopausal women who use hormones: evidence from a national cohort.  A national sample of 1944 white menopausal women greater than or equal to 55 years old from the epidemiologic follow-up of participants in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey was reviewed to investigate the role of hormone therapy in altering the risk of death from cardiovascular disease.  Women in the study were observed for up to 16 years after the baseline survey in 1971 to 1975.  By 1987 631 women had died; 347 of these deaths were due to cardiovascular disease.  History of diabetes (relative risk, 2.38; 95% confidence interval 1.73 to 3.26), previous myocardial infarction (relative risk, 2.12; 95% confidence interval 1.56 to 2.86), smoking (relative risk, 2.18; 95% confidence interval, 1.69 to 2.81), and elevated blood pressure (relative risk, 1.49; 95% confidence interval, 1.14 to 1.94) were strong predictors of cardiovascular disease-related death in this cohort.  After adjusting for known cardiovascular disease risk factors (smoking, cholesterol, body mass index, blood pressure, previous myocardial infarction, history of diabetes, age) and education, the use of postmenopausal hormones was associated with a reduced risk of death from cardiovascular disease (relative risk, 0.66; 95% confidence interval, 0.48 to 0.90).  The same protective effect provided by postmenopausal hormone therapy was seen in women who experienced natural menopause (relative risk, 0.69; 95% confidence interval, 0.45 to 1.06).
The prevalence of retinal vascular abnormalities in children and adolescents with essential hypertension.  We studied 97 children and adolescents with essential hypertension by evaluating photographs of the optic fundus and fluorescein angiography.  Photographs were examined for the presence of arteriolar narrowing, tortuosity, and arteriovenous nicking.  Intraobserver and interobserver variability in determination of abnormalities was low with agreement of 75% for narrowing, 90% for tortuosity, and 100% for arteriovenous nicking.  The prevalence of abnormalities was 41% (95% confidence interval, 31% to 50%) for arteriolar narrowing, 14% (95% confidence interval, 19% to 21%) for tortuosity, and 8% (95% confidence interval, 5% to 11%) for arteriovenous nicking.  Of 97 patients, 50 (51%) had one or more abnormality.  Retinal abnormalities are relatively common in young patients with essential hypertension.
Mucoid vasculopathy of unknown etiology.  A new vascular disorder with generalized deposition of abnormal amounts of acid mucopolysaccharide (AMPS) material in arteries, veins, and vasanervorum has been observed in a large number of autopsies at the author's institution.  It is unlike any of the known vascular diseases and has emerged as a distinct disorder of vascular connective tissue.  This has been named "mucoid vasculopathy of unknown etiology." This hitherto unreported entity is described here.
Giant left atrium--a case report.  A seventy-seven-year old woman, with mitral stenosis, presented with cardiomegaly evident on her chest roentgenogram.  The cardiac enlargement was due to a giant left atrium that distorted the cardiac structures.  An echocardiogram and a first-pass nuclear angiogram were able to delineate the huge left atrium.
Sudden appearance of coronary thrombus observed by angiography--a case report.  A sudden coronary thrombus formation was documented by chance during cardiac catheterization in a patient with postinfarction angina.  The thrombus was successfully treated with intravenous urokinase and heparin infusions, and thereafter, coronary angioplasty was performed without any complication.
Spontaneous cerebral embolism from descending thoracic aortic aneurysm--a case report.  A case in which an aneurysm of the proximal descending thoracic aorta was the likely source of retrograde cerebral embolism is described.  Atherosclerotic disease of the descending thoracic aorta should be considered as an unusual source of cerebral emboli.
Total occlusion of the left main coronary artery in a young woman with survival: a case report.  The total occlusion of the left main coronary artery (LMCA) is rare, and the survival depends on the existence of collateral circulation.  The author presents a case of total occlusion of the left main coronary artery with survival in a young woman because he thinks this is a very rare case, owing to the sex and age of the patient.
Axillary subclavian vein thrombosis. Changing patterns of etiology, diagnostic, and therapeutic modalities.  Fifty-two patients with axillary-subclavian vein thrombosis were treated in the last 10 years and were available for follow-up for at least 1 year.  Eighteen of these were treated in the first 5 years, Group A, and 34 in the last 5 years, Group B.  The causes in both Group A and Group B included respectively: effort or spontaneous 28 per cent and 29 per cent, catheter insertion related 17 per cent and 47 per cent, and malignancy or systemic disease 55 per cent and 24 per cent.  None of the patients in Group A had noninvasive vascular testing (NIT).  However, 27 patients in Group B had IPG/duplex imaging (NIT).  All 18 cases in Group A and 27 cases in Group B were treated conventionally (anticoagulants).  Seventy-three per cent of these had residual pain on exertion (venous claudication) and/or swelling.  Fourteen of these cases had posttreatment NIT/venography.  Four of these showed total resolution of the thrombus and all were symptom free.  Ten had no resolution, and nine were symptomatic.  Seven cases in Group B were treated with thrombolytic therapy.  Five of these had total resolution of thrombus and were symptom free (71%).  Two had no resolution with residual symptoms (29%) (statistically significant).  In conclusion (1) More patients with axillary-subclavian vein thrombosis seen recently are catheter insertion related; 2) Diagnosis should be initiated with duplex imaging; and (3) Thrombolytic therapy significantly decreased residual symptoms and yielded better resolution than anticoagulants.
Relation of left ventricular mass and geometry to morbidity and mortality in uncomplicated essential hypertension.  OBJECTIVE: To assess the prognostic significance of left ventricular mass and geometry in initially healthy persons with essential hypertension.  DESIGN: An observational study of a prospectively identified cohort.  SETTING: University medical center.  PATIENTS: Two hundred and eighty patients with essential hypertension and no pre-existing cardiac disease were evaluated using echocardiography between 1976 and 1981.  Two hundred and fifty-three subjects or their family members (90%) were contacted for a follow-up interview an average of 10.2 years after the initial echocardiogram was obtained; the survival status of 27 patients lost to follow-up was ascertained using National Death Index data.  MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Left ventricular mass exceeded 125 g/m2 in 69 of 253 patients (27%).  Cardiovascular events occurred in a higher proportion of patients with than without left ventricular hypertrophy (26% compared with 12%; P = 0.006).  Patients with increased ventricular mass were also at higher risk for cardiovascular death (14% compared with 0.5%; P less than 0.001) and all-cause mortality (16% compared with 2%; P = 0.001).  Electrocardiographic left ventricular hypertrophy did not predict risk.  Patients with normal left ventricular geometry had the fewest adverse outcomes (no cardiac deaths; morbid events in 11%), and those with concentric hypertrophy had the most (death in 21%; morbid events in 31%).  In a multivariate analysis, only age and left ventricular mass--but not gender, blood pressure, or serum cholesterol level--independently predicted all three outcome measures.  CONCLUSIONS: Echocardiographically determined left ventricular mass and geometry stratify risk in patients with essential hypertension independently of and more strongly than blood pressure or other potentially reversible risk factors and may help to stratify the need for intensive treatment.
The role of calcium channel blockers in the treatment of essential hypertension.  Calcium channel blockers, originally developed for the treatment of angina and supraventricular arrhythmias, have been shown to lower elevated blood pressure effectively in hypertensive patients.  Verapamil, nifedipine, and diltiazem represent prototype compounds for unique chemical classes with differing pharmacologic properties.  These drugs lower elevated blood pressure with efficacy comparable with other commonly used antihypertensives.  Combination therapy with other agents usually results in an additive response.  Side effects are usually mild and reversible and usually are an extension of the drug's pharmacologic effects.  Moreover, adverse metabolic effects on lipid, glucose, or potassium levels are not common.  Because of the excellent antihypertensive effects of calcium channel blockers and their potential importance in a variety of other disease states, these agents should be routinely considered for use as a first-line antihypertensive agent in appropriately selected patients with hypertension of any severity as part of a comprehensive plan to minimize cardiovascular risk.
A standard heparin nomogram for the management of heparin therapy.  A nomogram for the adjustment of heparin dosage was developed to standardize heparin therapy and to reduce delays in achieving and maintaining a therapeutic activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) result.  Fifty consecutive patients with acute venous thromboembolism had their continuous intravenous heparin therapy adjusted according to this heparin nomogram.  The effect of the nomogram on heparin therapy in these patients was compared with data from 53 historical control patients.  The proportion of patients in the nomogram group who reached a therapeutic APTT at 24 hours after the start of heparin therapy was 66%, which increased to 81% at 48 hours.  In contrast, 37% and 58% of the control patients reached a therapeutic APTT at 24 and 48 hours, respectively.  The percentage of therapeutic APTT results of the total number of APTT determinations was greater in the nomogram patients than controls.  The use of this heparin nomogram resulted in (1) achieving a therapeutic APTT at 24 and 48 hours in a large proportion of patients and (2) reduced periods of inadequate anticoagulation and overanticoagulation during heparin therapy.
Ventricular tachycardia during routine treadmill testing. Risk and prognosis.  Exercise-induced ventricular tachycardia during exercise testing is considered to increase risk during testing.  Moreover, exercise-induced ventricular tachycardia has been considered to confer a poor prognosis although this has not been specifically studied.  On a retrospective review of 3351 patients who had undergone routine clinical exercise testing between September 1984 and June 1989, we identified 55 patients with exercise-induced ventricular tachycardia.  The mean follow-up was 26 months (range, 2 to 58 months).  Fifty patients had nonsustained ventricular tachycardia during exercise testing and one of these patients died due to congestive heart failure during the follow-up period.  Five patients had sustained ventricular tachycardia during exercise testing and one died suddenly 7 months after the test.  Ventricular tachycardia was reproduced in only two of the 29 patients who underwent repeated exercise testing.  Ventricular tachycardia during routine clinical exercise testing occurred rarely (prevalence of 1.5%) and was not associated with complications during testing.  The total mortality in the exercise-induced ventricular tachycardia group (3.6%) was not significantly different from the mortality in the entire population (5.1%).  Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia occurring during clinical exercise testing is not an independent marker of a poor prognosis.
An echocardiographic assessment of atrial mechanical behaviour.  Relations between movement of the atrioventricular ring and changes in left atrial and ventricular dimensions were studied by echocardiography and compared with apexcardiography and Doppler mitral flow velocity traces in 20 healthy controls and in patients with left ventricular hypertrophy (n = 28) or dilatation (n = 16).  During left ventricular systole the atrioventricular ring, a structure common to ventricle and atrium, moved towards the ventricular apex, thus increasing left atrial volume.  This action matched pulmonary venous return because it was in phase with the transverse left atrial dimension measured from aortic root to posterior left atrial wall.  During early diastole, the mitral ring moved rapidly towards the atrium as transmitral flow accelerated.  This requires a force directed from ventricle to atrium, likely to be the result of elastic recoil arising from compression of the ventricular myocardium or stretching of the atrial myocardium during ventricular systole.  Two additional mechanisms of ventricular filling with atrial systole were recognised: (a) an increase in ventricular volume as the atrioventricular ring moved upwards and (b) transverse left ventricular expansion by pressure driven transmitral flow.  The former is undetectable by Doppler from the apex; it accounted for 10% of ventricular filling in the healthy controls, but for significantly less in those with ventricular dilatation.  In left ventricular hypertrophy, left ventricular filling was maintained by both mechanisms compensating for the reduced increase in volume early in diastole.  Interactions between the atrium and ventricle are functionally important during ventricular systole, early diastole, and in atrial systole.  They are not included in the traditional separation of atrial function into reservoir, conduit, and pump functions.
End diastolic flow velocity just beneath the aortic isthmus assessed by pulsed Doppler echocardiography: a new predictor of the aortic regurgitant fraction.  End diastolic flow velocity just beneath the aortic isthmus was measured within 72 hours of cardiac catheterisation by pulsed Doppler echocardiography in 30 controls and 61 patients with aortic regurgitation.  The end diastolic flow velocity was determined at the peak R wave on a simultaneously recorded electrocardiogram.  In all controls there was no reverse flow at the end diastole beneath the aortic isthmus.  In patients with aortic regurgitation the end diastolic flow velocity correlated well with the angiographic grade of regurgitation (r = 0.81) and regurgitant fraction (r = 0.82).  The mean (SD) values were 6.3 (5.2), 12.2 (4.3), 22.1 (5.7), and 34.3 (9.3) cm/s for patients with regurgitant fraction of less than 20%, between 20% and 40%, between 41% and 60%, and greater than 60%, respectively.  An end diastolic flow velocity of greater than 18 cm/s predicted a regurgitant fraction of greater than or equal to 40% with a sensitivity of 88.5% and a specificity of 96%.  The study suggests that the pulsed Doppler derived end diastolic flow velocity is a useful index in the routine non-invasive assessment of the severity of aortic regurgitation.
Interatrial shunt flow profiles in newborn infants: a colour flow and pulsed Doppler echocardiographic study.  Interatrial shunt flow profiles in 36 normal term infants were examined serially by colour flow and pulsed Doppler echocardiographic techniques from within an hour of birth to four or five days after birth.  Shunt flow across the foramen ovale was detected in 33 normal infants (92%) within an hour of birth (mean 40 minutes).  The occurrence of interatrial shunting decreased with age, but a shunt signal was still detected in 17 infants (47%) on the fourth or fifth day of life, by then the ductus arteriosus had already closed in all the normal infants.  The direction of interatrial shunt flow was predominantly left-to-right, but in 64% there was a coexistent small right-to-left shunt in diastole within an hour of birth; by four to five days it was found in 19%.  In the six patients with persistent fetal circulation the direction of the interatrial shunt flow was predominantly right-to-left with biphasic peaks in diastole and systole at the early stage of the disease, and the period of right-to-left shunt flow during each cardiac cycle was significantly longer than that in normal infants examined within 1 hour of birth.  In all patients the ductus closed before the foramen ovale.  At the time of ductal closure in all patients with persistent fetal circulation right-to-left shunt flow was seen during diastole and its period was still prolonged.  These findings suggest that interatrial shunting, predominantly left-to-right, is common in normal newborn infants.
Extrahepatic portal vein aneurysm associated with a tortuous portal vein.  Portal vein aneurysm is rare and its etiology is controversial.  A case of extrahepatic portal vein aneurysm associated with an unusually tortuous portal vein is described.  Real-time ultrasonography showed anechoic masslike lesions at the porta hepatis communicating with the superior mesenteric vein and intrahepatic portal branches.  This suggested the presence of two saccular portal vein aneurysms, 27 x 21 mm and 21 x 13 mm in size.  Magnetic resonance imaging and portal venography confirmed the portal vein aneurysms and an unusually tortuous portal vein curving caudally between them.  The liver was histologically normal and there was no evidence of portal hypertension.  It is speculated that these portal vein aneurysms may have been congenital and that the associated tortuous portal vein might have been secondary to hemodynamic changes in the portal venous system.
Factors determining improvement in left ventricular function after reperfusion therapy for acute myocardial infarction: primacy of baseline ejection fraction.  Improvement in left ventricular ejection fraction is a measure of salvage of ischemic myocardium after reperfusion therapy for acute myocardial infarction.  The degree of improvement in left ventricular ejection fraction may be influenced by many factors.  Therefore, 137 patients in whom paired radionuclide angiograms were obtained within 24 h of acute infarction and before hospital discharge were retrospectively evaluated to determine which factors most affect improvement in ejection fraction.  Only baseline ejection fraction correlated significantly with improvement in ejection fraction by both univariate analysis (ejection fraction as a continuous variable; p less than 0.001; ejection fraction as a categorical variable, less than or equal to 45% versus greater than 45%, p less than 0.0001) and multivariate analysis (p less than 0.0001).  Reperfusion status (patent versus occluded infarct artery) and extent of coronary artery disease (one, two or three vessel) were significant factors by multivariate but not by univariate analysis.  Location of infarction, treatment modality and time to treatment did not correlate with change in ejection fraction by either statistical technique.  Thus, of those factors tested, baseline left ventricular ejection fraction is the most potent predictor of improvement in ventricular function after acute infarction.  Knowledge of baseline ejection fraction may be helpful in deciding whether to treat some patients with equivocal indications or contraindications for reperfusion therapy.  Clinical trials of reperfusion strategies should stratify patients on the basis of baseline ejection fraction if ejection fraction is to be used as an end point for myocardial salvage.
Incidence and clinical significance of transient creatine kinase elevations and the diagnosis of non-Q wave myocardial infarction associated with coronary angioplasty.  To assess the incidence and clinical significance of elevated total plasma creatine kinase (CK) and MB isoenzyme fraction after apparently successful coronary angioplasty, a prospective study of 272 consecutive elective procedures was undertaken.  Total CK (normal less than 100 IU/liter) and CK MB isoenzyme (normal less than 4%) were measured immediately after successful completion of the procedure and every 6 h for 24 h.  All nonelective procedures and results not fulfilling all American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Task Force guideline criteria for a successful result were excluded from analysis.  Of the 272 elective procedures, 249 (92%) were successfully; abnormally elevated CK or CK MB serum levels, or both, were found in 38 (15%) of the successful outcomes.  Three patterns of abnormal enzymes were identified: 15 patients with CK greater than or equal to 200 IU/liter and CK MB greater than or equal to 5% (group 1), 4 patients with CK greater than or equal to 200 IU/litter and CK MB less than or equal to 4% (group 2) and 19 patients with CK less than 200 IU/liter and CK MB greater than or equal to 5% (group 3).  The three groups were distinguishable by the nature of the complications causing the enzyme release (in particular, the etiology and clinical manifestations).  There were significantly more clinically apparent events in group 1 than in the other groups (13 of 15 versus 11 of 23, p less than 0.01) and more events associated with persistent electrocardiographic changes (p = 0.05) and chest pain (p less than 0.05).  However, no clinically important sequelae were recognizable in any group at hospital discharge.  Thus, abnormal cardiac serum enzyme release after apparently successful coronary angioplasty is 1) relatively common; 2) has many possible causes, including both minor complications and early reversibility of impending major complications; and 3) results in no permanent clinical sequelae.
Long-term follow-up of medical versus surgical therapy for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a retrospective study   In a retrospective analysis 139 patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were followed up for 8.9 years (range 1 to 28 years).  Patients were divided into two groups: Group 1 consisted of 60 patients with medical therapy and Group 2 of 79 patients with surgical therapy (septal myectomy).  Groups 1 and 2 were subdivided according to the medical treatment.  Group 1a received propranolol, 160 mg/day (n = 20); Group 1b verapamil, 360 mg/day (n = 18); and Group 1c, no therapy (n = 22).  Group 2a received verapamil, 120 to 360 mg/day, after septal myectomy (n = 17) and Group 2b had no medical therapy after surgery (n = 62).  In Group 1, 19 patients died (annual mortality rate 3.6%) and in Group 2, 17 patients died (mortality rate 2.4%, p = NS).  Of the patients who died, approximately one half to two thirds in both Groups 1 and 2 died suddenly and the other one half to one third died because of congestive heart failure.  The 10 year cumulative survival rate was 67% in Group 1, significantly smaller than that in Group 2 (84%, p less than 0.05).  In the subgroups, the 10 year survival rate was 67% in Group 1a, 80% in 1b (p less than 0.05 versus 1a) and 65% in 1c (p less than 0.05 versus 1b).  The 10 year survival rate was 100% in Group 2a (p less than 0.05 versus 1a, 1b, 1c) and 78% in Group 2b (p less than 0.05 versus 2a).  It is concluded that cumulative survival rate is significantly better in surgically than in medically treated patients.
Prediction of the frequency and duration of ambulatory myocardial ischemia in patients with stable coronary artery disease by determination of the ischemic threshold from exercise testing: importance of the exercise protocol   The relation between ambulatory myocardial ischemia and the results of exercise testing in patients with ischemic heart disease remains undefined, because of the dissimilar results of previous reports.  To further investigate this issue and, in particular, to ascertain the importance of the exercise protocol in determining that relation, 70 patients with stable coronary artery disease underwent 48 h ambulatory electrocardiographic (ECG) monitoring and treadmill exercise tests after withdrawal of medications.  Patients exercised using two different protocols with slow (National Institutes of Health [NIH] combined protocol) and brisk (Bruce protocol) work load increments.  Exercise duration was longer with the NIH combined protocol (14.1 +/- 5 versus 6.8 +/- 2 min; p less than 0.0001), but the maximal work load and peak heart rate achieved were greater with the Bruce protocol (9.8 +/- 2 versus 6.5 +/- 2 METs, and 142 +/- 19 versus 133 +/- 22 beats/min, respectively; p less than 0.0001).  A close inverse correlation between exercise testing and the results of ambulatory ECG monitoring was observed using the NIH combined protocol; the strongest correlation was observed between time of exercise at 1 mm of ST segment depression and number of ischemic episodes (r = -0.86; p less than 0.0001).  With the Bruce protocol a significantly weaker inverse correlation was found (r = -0.35).  The mean heart rate at the onset of ST segment depression was similar during monitoring and during exercise testing with the NIH combined protocol (97.2 +/- 13 versus 101.0 +/- 17 beats/min, respectively) but it was significantly higher (110.4 +/- 13) when using the Bruce protocol (p less than 0.001).
Effects of standing on the induction of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia.  To evaluate the effects of standing on induction of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, electrophysiologic studies were performed in both the supine and standing positions in 22 patients with atrioventricular (AV) reciprocating tachycardia and in 11 with AV node reentrant tachycardia.  AV reciprocating tachycardia was induced in 9 of the 22 patients with AV reciprocating tachycardia when they were in the supine position and in 17 when standing.  The effective refractory period of the AV node markedly shortened, from 275 +/- 72 to 203 +/- 30 ms (n = 16, p less than 0.005) after standing.  The effective refractory period of the accessory pathway shortened slightly, from 293 +/- 75 to 278 +/- 77 ms (n = 8, p less than 0.005), after standing.  AV node reentrant tachycardia was induced in 3 of the 11 patients with AV node reentrant tachycardia when they were in the supine position and in 6 when standing.  The effective refractory periods of the slow pathway and fast pathway shortened markedly, from 293 +/- 72 to 216 +/- 40 ms (n = 6, p less than 0.025) and from 416 +/- 85 to 277 +/- 50 ms (n = 10, p less than 0.005), respectively, after standing.  Plasma norepinephrine levels increased during standing both in patients with AV reciprocating and in those with AV node reentrant tachycardia (n = 11, p less than 0.005, n = 8, p less than 0.005, respectively).  In conclusion, standing, which is associated with increased sympathetic tone, changed the electrophysiologic properties of the reentrant circuits, facilitating induction of AV reciprocating tachycardia and AV node reentrant tachycardia.
Surgery for Ebstein's anomaly: the clinical and echocardiographic evaluation of a new technique.  Ten consecutive patients (age range 4 to 44 years, mean 22) underwent surgical repair of Ebstein's anomaly by vertical plication of the right ventricle and reimplantation of the tricuspid valve leaflets.  No patient died during or after operation.  Intraoperative postbypass echocardiography documented a good result in nine patients but severe tricuspid regurgitation in one patient, who then underwent prosthetic valve replacement during a second period of cardiopulmonary bypass.  Two of four patients who had had right ventricular papillary muscle dysfunction in the early postoperative period showed improved papillary muscle function with concomitant reduction of tricuspid regurgitation 6 months later.  All patients were evaluated clinically and by echocardiography 2 to 23 months later.  All patients showed clinical improvement, seven by one functional class and three by two classes.  All were in sinus rhythm.  The mean cardiothoracic ratio decreased by 6% (p less than 0.05).  On bicycle ergometry performed in six patients, peak oxygen consumption exceeded 20 ml/kg per min in five.  Tricuspid regurgitation diminished in eight patients (by three grades in two patients, by two grades in five and by one grade in one patient); it remained unchanged in two.  Comparison of preoperative and postoperative pulsed Doppler flow velocities across the pulmonary valve showed an increase in the peak velocity of flow across the valve (mean 83 +/- 14 versus 97 +/- 11 cm/s, p less than 0.005) and a decrease in the time to peak velocity (mean 130 +/- 16 versus 91 +/- 23 ms, p less than 0.05).
The role of chronotropic impairment during exercise after the Mustard operation.  To better understand the role of chronotropic impairment on exercise performance after the atrial switch (Mustard) operation, 20 patients who had undergone this operation for uncomplicated d-transposition of the great arteries exercised to maximal volition using a 1 min incremental treadmill protocol.  Heart rate, oxygen consumption, carbon dioxide production and minute ventilation were monitored continuously.  Two-dimensional echocardiograms were obtained before testing to calculate the right ventricular inflow volume indexed to body surface area.  All patients achieved maximal aerobic capacity based on their ventilatory patterns and respiratory exchange ratio.  Maximal heart rate was reduced (175 beats/min; 87% of predicted for age) and maximal oxygen consumption was decreased (31 ml/kg per min; 75% of predicted for age and gender).  There was no correlation between maximal oxygen consumption and maximal heart rate.  Right ventricular volume index, however, had a significant inverse correlation with maximal heart rate (r = -0.62, p less than 0.005).  There was no correlation between right ventricular volume index and heart rate at rest.  These results suggest that decreased maximal oxygen consumption in patients after the Mustard procedure is not a result of chronotropic impairment.  Right ventricular dilation may be a compensatory response to chronotropic impairment.
Effect of captopril, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, in patients with angina pectoris and heart failure   The effects of captopril and placebo were compared in 18 patients with chronic heart failure and angina pectoris with use of a double-blind crossover trial design.  Symptoms were assessed by patient treatment preference, visual analogue scores and nitroglycerin consumption.  Exercise performance was assessed using two different treadmill protocols of different work intensity with simultaneous measurement of oxygen consumption and by supine bicycle exercise and simultaneous radionuclide ventriculography.  Arrhythmias were assessed by 48 h ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring.  Patients generally preferred placebo to captopril, and this appeared to be due to an increase in symptoms of angina with captopril.  Treadmill exercise time on a high intensity protocol was shorter with captopril than with placebo; on a low intensity protocol, angina became a more frequent limiting symptom even though overall exercise performance was not changed.  The heart rate-blood pressure product was reduced, but largely because of a reduction in blood pressure rather than in heart rate.  During supine bicycle exercise, no differences in symptoms, exercise performance, ejection fraction or changes in blood pressure were noted and ventricular arrhythmias were reduced.  Captopril does not appear to be clinically useful in alleviating angina pectoris in patients with heart failure, and this effect may be related to a decrease in coronary perfusion pressure.  Nonetheless, desirable metabolic effects, a reduction in arrhythmias and potential effects on survival require further study of captopril in patients with both angina and heart failure.
Regional myocardial blood flow and left ventricular diastolic properties in pacing-induced ischemia.  The relation between left ventricular diastolic abnormalities and myocardial blood flow during ischemia was studied in eight open chest dogs with critical stenoses of the proximal left anterior descending and circumflex coronary arteries.  The heart was paced at 1.7 times the heart rate at rest for 3 min.  In dogs with coronary stenoses, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure increased from 8 +/- 1 to 14 +/- 2 mm Hg during pacing tachycardia (p less than 0.01) and 16 +/- 3 mm Hg (p less than 0.01) after pacing, with increased end-diastolic and end-systolic segment lengths in the ischemic regions.  Left ventricular diastolic pressure-segment length relations for ischemic regions shifted upward during and after pacing tachycardia in dogs with coronary stenoses, indicating decreased regional diastolic distensibility.  In dogs without coronary stenoses, the left ventricular diastolic pressure-segment length relation was unaltered.  Pacing tachycardia without coronary stenoses induced an increase in anterograde coronary blood flow (assessed by flow meter) in both the left anterior descending and circumflex coronary arteries, and a decrease in regional vascular resistance.  In dogs with coronary stenoses, regional vascular resistance before pacing was decreased by 18%; myocardial blood flow (assessed by microspheres) was unchanged in both the left anterior descending and circumflex coronary artery territories.  During pacing tachycardia with coronary stenoses, regional coronary vascular resistance did not decrease further; subendocardial myocardial blood flow distal to the left anterior descending coronary artery stenosis decreased (from 1.03 +/- 0.07 to 0.67 +/- 0.12 ml/min per g, p less than 0.01), as did subendocardial to subepicardial blood flow ratio (from 1.04 +/- 0.09 to 0.42 +/- 0.08, p less than 0.01).
Pressure-length loop area: its components analyzed during graded myocardial ischemia.  The changes in total pressure-length loop area were compared with changes in effective shortening area, systolic lengthening area and postsystolic shortening area (defined with respect to end-diastolic and end-systolic lengths) of the pressure-length loop during myocardial ischemia in seven anesthetized dogs instrumented for measurement of left ventricular pressure and regional segmental wall motion (sonomicrometry) in the minor axis of the apical region of the left ventricle.  Ischemia was induced by gradual tightening of a micrometer-controlled snare around the left anterior descending coronary artery, which supplied the apical myocardium.  Data were obtained at normal flow, after critical constriction (loss of pulsatile coronary flow), mild ischemia (ischemia 1: onset of regional dysfunction, i.e., postsystolic shortening and mild hypokinesia) and moderate ischemia (ischemia 2: marked hypokinesia).  At each stage, acute afterloading was performed by partially occluding the descending thoracic aorta.  The pressure-length loops were analyzed in terms of four areas: total loop area, effective shortening area, postsystolic shortening area and systolic lengthening area.  Total loop area decreased only when marked hypokinesia was present (176 +/- 18.3 mm Hg x mm at ischemia 2 versus 245.1 +/- 26.9 mm Hg x mm at ischemia 1, p less than 0.05).  However, effective shortening area (98.2 +/- 0.8% of total loop area at baseline; 93.8 +/- 2.4% at critical constriction; 76.3 +/- 7.2% at ischemia 1; 51.9 +/- 12.2% at ischemia 2) and postsystolic shortening area (1.8 +/- 0.8% of total loop area at baseline; 5.2 +/- 1.9% at critical constriction; 14.3 +/- 3/4% at ischemia 1; 23.8 +/- 5.1% at ischemia 2) changed significantly with each progressive stage of ischemia.
Follow-up of patients with low output, low gradient hemodynamics after percutaneous balloon aortic valvuloplasty: the Mansfield Scientific Aortic Valvuloplasty Registry.  Symptomatic patients with a low cardiac output and low aortic valve gradient have a poor prognosis but are at high risk for aortic valve surgery.  The outcome of percutaneous balloon aortic valvuloplasty in this subgroup of patients is unclear.  Therefore, 67 patients (group 1) underwent percutaneous balloon aortic valvuloplasty between December 1, 1986 and November 1, 1987 who had a low cardiac index (less than 2.5 liters/min per m2) and a low aortic valve gradient (less than or equal to 40 mm Hg) before the procedure.  The results were compared with 200 patients (group 2) who had a low cardiac index but not a low aortic valve gradient (greater than 40 mm Hg) before the procedure and who had similar baseline presenting symptoms.  After balloon aortic valvuloplasty, there was a greater decrease in aortic valve gradient in patients in group 2 than in patients in group 1 (mean +/- SD -33.0 +/- 16.7 mm Hg and -14.6 +/- 6.9 mm Hg, respectively; p less than 0.001) although there was no significant difference in improvement in estimated aortic valve area (0.31 +/- 0.21 and 0.31 +/- 0.22 cm2, respectively; p = NS).  In-hospital mortality was 11.9% for patients in group 1 which was not significantly different from the 7.5% mortality for patients in group 2.  However, the actuarial probability of survival at 12 months for patients who survived the initial hospitalization was 46% in group 1 and 64% in group 2 (p less than 0.05).  Moreover, at follow-up (mean 8.8 months) 64% of surviving group 1 patients displayed clinical improvement, compared with 70% of surviving group 2 patients.
Platelet thromboxane release and delayed cerebral ischemia in patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage.  Adenosine diphosphate-induced platelet aggregation and associated thromboxane B2 release were studied in 52 patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) in order to detect a possible association between altered platelet function and development of cerebral ischemic complications after SAH.  Compared to the values on admission, the patients showed significantly increased platelet aggregability (p less than 0.05) and thromboxane release (p less than 0.001) 1 to 2 weeks after SAH.  The highest values of thromboxane release were seen in patients who deteriorated due to delayed cerebral ischemia with a permanent neurological deficit.  Thromboxane release was significantly higher (p less than 0.05) before the onset of severe delayed ischemia in six patients with preoperative ischemia compared to the patients without delayed ischemia.  In five others, both ischemic deterioration and elevated thromboxane release occurred after operation.  These patients had preoperative values similar to the values in those without ischemic symptoms.  The observations suggest that increased platelet aggregability and thromboxane release are associated with delayed cerebral ischemia both before and after surgery.
Endovascular occlusion of vertebral arteries in the treatment of unclippable vertebrobasilar aneurysms.  Twenty-one patients with aneurysms of the vertebrobasilar circulation underwent unilateral or bilateral endovascular occlusion of the vertebral artery.  Six patients presented with subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), 10 with mass effect, four with mass effect and SAH, and one with ischemic symptoms.  Thirteen patients had good outcomes with complete clinical and angiographic cure.  Six patients had partial thrombosis of their aneurysms.  There was one death and one treatment failure.  One patient suffered transient stroke.  It is concluded that endovascular occlusion of the vertebral artery following test occlusion is a safe and effective treatment for proximal aneurysms of the vertebrobasilar circulation.
Effect of 21-aminosteroid U-74006F on lipid peroxidation in subarachnoid clot.  The present study was undertaken to investigate the effect of U-74006F on malondialdehyde (a by-product of lipid peroxidation) in subarachnoid clot.  Eighteen cynomolgus monkeys were divided into three groups of six each.  There were two U-74006F-treated groups, receiving doses of 0.3 or 1.0 mg/kg, and a placebo-treated group.  Each monkey underwent baseline cerebral angiography followed by right-sided craniectomy and placement of subarachnoid clot around the middle cerebral artery (MCA).  Treatment was administered intravenously every 8 hours for 6 days.  Seven days after the experimental subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), angiography was repeated and the animals were killed.  In the placebo-treated group, significant vasospasm occurred in the MCA on the side of the clot (p less than 0.01).  After U-74006F treatment at both dosages, significantly less vasospasm developed in the clot-side MCA (p less than 0.01).  The content of malondialdehyde was measured by both the thiobarbituric acid test and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).  Comparing the two methods, HPLC proved to be more accurate than the thiobarbituric acid test, especially for measurement of low concentrations of malondialdehyde.  In the placebo-treated group, the malondialdehyde content was significantly increased in the Day 7 clot (p less than 0.05).  In contrast, malondialdehyde content in freshly prepared clot was very low.  In the 0.3-mg/kg U-74006F group, the malondialdehyde content of clot was significantly less at Day 7 compared to clot from the placebo-treated group (p less than 0.05).  Although the malondialdehyde content of clot from the 1.0 mg/kg U-74006F-treated group was less than that of placebo, it was not significantly so.  Malondialdehyde was not detected in the actual vessel wall of the MCA of any group.  These results suggest that lipid peroxidation in subarachnoid clot may play a role in the pathogenesis of vasospasm and that the salutary effects of U-74006F in vasospasm may be mediated by a reduction of lipid peroxidation in SAH.
Superior hypophyseal artery aneurysm. Report of two cases.  Two cases of saccular intracranial aneurysms arising from the superior hypophyseal artery take-off from the internal carotid artery are presented.  The angiographic findings and technical details of the operative approach are discussed.  Particular attention is focused on the use of fenestrated angled clips.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage from a dissecting aneurysm of the middle cerebral artery. Case report.  A case of subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) from a dissecting aneurysm of the inferior limb of the middle cerebral artery is reported.  The patient's clinical status and the initial and follow-up angiographic appearance of the aneurysm are presented.  Diagnosis and treatment are briefly discussed.  It is suggested that, if angiography demonstrates luminal narrowing or vascular occlusion in a patient with unexplained SAH, a dissecting aneurysm of the carotid system should be considered as a cause of the hemorrhage.
The role of alpha adrenoceptor subtypes in sympathetic control of the acral-cutaneous microcirculation.  In pithed and anesthetized rats, laser-Doppler flowmetry was used to evaluate the role of alpha-1 and alpha-2 adrenoceptors in mediating sympathetic responses in acral regions of the cutaneous circulation.  The intravenous administration of the selective alpha-1 agonist, phenylephrine, was a more potent vasopressor agent than BH-T 933 (a selective alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonist) in pithed rats.  However, BH-T 933 was more potent and more efficacious than phenylephrine in reducing cutaneous microvascular perfusion (CP).  BH-T 933 also caused a greater increase in cutaneous microvascular resistance.  Neural and humoral sympathetic effects on CP were characterized with selective alpha-1 and alpha-2 adrenoceptor antagonists (prazosin and rauwolscine, respectively).  It was found that frequency-related reductions in CP elicited by sciatic nerve stimulation were antagonized by prazosin, but not by rauwolscine.  In fact, rauwolscine enhanced neurally evoked reductions in CP at the highest stimulation frequencies.  However, both prazosin and rauwolscine antagonized reductions in CP elicited by electrical stimulation of the thoracolumbar outflow (sympathoadrenal activation).  Ganglionic stimulation (intravenous 1,1-dimethyl-4-phenylpiperazinium) also caused a profound, transient reduction in CP that was abolished by rauwolscine, but was not significantly altered by prazosin.  In contrast, 1,1-dimethyl-4-phenylpiperazinium-induced increases in mean arterial pressure were reduced by prazosin, but not by rauwolscine.  In ketamine-anesthetized rats, rauwolscine caused a dose-related increase in CP without altering mean arterial pressure, whereas prazosin lowered mean arterial pressure but did not alter CP.  We conclude that acral regions of the cutaneous vasculature are more sensitive to alpha-2 vis-a-vis alpha-1 adrenoceptor-mediated vasoconstriction.
Peripheral alpha-1 and alpha-2 adrenergic receptors in three models of hypertension in rats: an in vitro autoradiography study.  In vitro autoradiography was used to compare peripheral alpha-1 and alpha-2 adrenergic receptor binding in various tissues using [3H]prazosin and [3H]rauwolscine, respectively, in three models of experimental hypertension in rats.  Models studied included two-kidney, one-clip hypertension, one-kidney, one-clip hypertension, desoxycorticosterone-salt hypertension, and three normotensive control groups: two-kidney control, one-kidney control and salt-loaded control.  Blood pressures at death were significantly higher in all three hypertensive groups compared with normotensive controls, but there were no significant differences among the hypertensive or normotensive groups.  Plasma norepinephrine levels were significantly elevated in all three hypertensive groups compared with respective controls, with no significant differences among hypertensive or control groups.  In all three hypertensive groups, there were significant reductions in binding of aortic and mesenteric vascular alpha-1 receptors, renal tubular alpha-1 and alpha-2 receptors, and adrenal cortical alpha-2 receptors when compared with respective control groups.  Reduced binding of cardiac ventricular alpha-1 and alpha-2 receptors was also found in all hypertensive groups, but not to statistically significant levels.  No significant differences in intestinal alpha-1 and alpha-2 receptor binding were detected in either hypertensive or normotensive groups.  The results suggest increased peripheral sympathetic activity in all three models of experimental hypertension, which is associated with down-regulation of alpha-1 and alpha-2 receptors in a number of peripheral tissues, especially those that control cardiovascular hemodynamics and fluid and salt balance.  There is no evidence of an increase in peripheral alpha receptor binding as has often been found in some models of genetic or spontaneous hypertension.
Divergent effects of serotonin on coronary-artery dimensions and blood flow in patients with coronary atherosclerosis and control patients   BACKGROUND.  Studies in animals have shown that serotonin constricts coronary arteries if the endothelium is damaged, but in vitro studies have revealed a vasodilating effect on isolated coronary segments with an intact endothelium.  To investigate the effect of serotonin in humans, we studied coronary-artery cross-sectional area and blood flow before and after the infusion of serotonin in seven patients with angiographically normal coronary arteries and in seven with coronary artery disease.  METHODS.  We measured the cross-sectional area of the coronary artery by quantitative angiography and coronary blood flow with an intracoronary Doppler catheter.  Measurements were obtained at base line and during intracoronary infusions of serotonin (0.1, 1, and 10 micrograms per kilogram of body weight per minute, for two minutes).  We repeated the measurements after an infusion of ketanserin, an antagonist of serotonin receptors that is thought to block the effect of serotonin on receptors in the arterial wall but not in the endothelium.  RESULTS.  In patients with normal coronary arteries, the highest dose of serotonin increased cross-sectional area by 52 percent (P less than 0.001) and blood flow by 58 percent (P less than 0.01).  The effect was significantly potentiated by administration of ketanserin.  In patients with coronary-artery atherosclerosis, serotonin reduced cross-sectional area by 64 percent (P less than 0.001) and blood flow by 59 percent (P less than 0.001).  Ketanserin prevented this effect.  CONCLUSIONS.  Serotonin has a vasodilating effect on normal human coronary arteries; when the endothelium is damaged, as in coronary artery disease, serotonin has a direct, unopposed vasoconstricting effect.  When considered with other evidence, these data suggest that platelet-derived factors such as serotonin may have a role in certain acute coronary ischemic syndromes.
Effect of intracoronary serotonin on coronary vessels in patients with stable angina and patients with variant angina   BACKGROUND.  Serotonin, a major product of platelet activation, has potent vasoactive effects in animal models, but its role in human coronary artery disease remains largely speculative.  METHODS.  Using quantitative coronary angiography, we compared the effects of the intracoronary infusion of graded concentrations of serotonin (10(-7) to 10(-4) mol per liter) on coronary vessels in two groups of patients with different clinical presentations of coronary disease (nine with stable angina and five with variant angina), with the effects in a control group of eight subjects with normal vessels on angiography.  RESULTS.  Normal coronary vessels had a biphasic response to intracoronary serotonin: dilation at concentrations up to 10(-5) mol per liter, but constriction at 10(-4) mol per liter.  Vessels in patients with stable angina constricted at all concentrations, with mean (+/- SEM) maximal decreases in diameter of 23.9 +/- 3.6, 33.1 +/- 3.9, and 41.7 +/- 3.1 percent from base line in proximal, middle, and distal segments at a serotonin concentration of 10(-4) mol per liter.  Smooth segments constricted more than irregular segments (42.0 +/- 4.6 vs.  21.1 +/- 1.6 percent).  Four patients with stable angina had a marked reduction in collateral filling.  All the patients with stable angina had angina during the intracoronary infusion of serotonin, and electrocardiographic changes were noted in six.  All the patients with variant angina had angina, electrocardiographic changes, and localized occlusive epicardial coronary-artery spasm at concentrations of 10(-6) (n = 2) or 10(-5) (n = 3) mol per liter.  CONCLUSIONS.  Patients with stable coronary disease do not have the normal vasodilator response to intracoronary serotonin, but rather have progressive constriction, which is particularly intense in small distal and collateral vessels.  Patients with variant angina have occlusive coronary-artery spasm at a dose that dilates normal vessels and causes only slight constriction in vessels from patients with stable angina.  These findings suggest that serotonin, released after the intracoronary activation of platelets, may contribute to or cause myocardial ischemia in patients with coronary artery disease.
Orbitozygomatic temporopolar approach for a high basilar tip aneurysm associated with a short intracranial internal carotid artery: a new surgical approach.  For two cases of a high basilar tip aneurysm accompanied by a short intracranial internal carotid artery, the orbitozygomatic temporopolar approach consisting of an en bloc fronto-orbitozygomatic temporal craniotomy and temporopolar approach was carried out.  On angiograms, the height of the bifurcation of an elongated basilar artery and the length of the intracranial internal carotid artery from the interclinoid line between the anterior and posterior clinoid process were 20 mm and 6 mm in Case 1, and 18 mm and 5 mm in Case 2, respectively.  The skin flap was separated subfascially to preserve the frontotemporal branch of the facial nerve.  The fronto-orbitozygomatic temporal bone flap was made, and a part of the basal bony structures of the orbital roof, the sphenoid ridge, and the temporal bone were removed.  The basilar tip aneurysm could be seen and clipped easily by upward and oblique viewing from below through the wide operative space consisting of the less retracted internal carotid and middle cerebral arteries, the oculomotor nerve, the tentorial hiatus, and the emptied anterior temporal fossa obtained by partial division of the temporal bridging veins.  The operative procedure is presented in detail and compared with other surgical approaches that have been described previously.
Impairment of cerebral autoregulation during the development of chronic cerebral vasospasm after subarachnoid hemorrhage in primates.  We studied the impairment of autoregulation of cerebral blood flow (CBF) and its effect on the electrical activity of the brain during the development of chronic cerebral vasospasm after subarachnoid hemorrhage, using a vasospasm model in primates.  Fourteen animals were divided into two groups: a clot group (8) and a sham-operated group (6).  To induce subarachnoid hemorrhage, all the animals underwent craniectomy, and in the clot group, the autologous blood clot was located around the arteries dissected free from the arachnoid membrane.  Cerebral angiography was performed before subarachnoid hemorrhage and 7 days after (Day 7).  On Day 7, regional CBF in the parietal lobe--measured by the hydrogen clearance method--and central conduction time were studied during either graded hypertension or hypotension.  In the clot group, the mean vessel caliber of the cerebral arteries on the right side (clot side) of the circle of Willis showed significant (P less than 0.01) reduction (more than 40%) as compared with the values on the contralateral, non-clot side.  The values for the bilateral parietal CBF in the sham-operated group and the left parietal CBF in the clot group were fairly constant when the mean arterial blood pressure (MABP) was in the range of 60 to 160 mm Hg.  In the clot group, right parietal CBF was significantly (P less than 0.05) smaller than that on the left side at an MABP level of 40 to 100 mm Hg, and increased at an MABP level of 180 mm Hg.  The right parietal CBF increased as the arterial blood pressure increased, showing impairment of autoregulation.
Cavernous malformations and capillary telangiectasia: a spectrum within a single pathological entity.  Cerebral vascular malformations have traditionally been divided into four categories: arteriovenous, venous, cavernous, and capillary telangiectases.  A controversy exists about separating the latter two lesions into separate entities.  Critics claim the distinction is arbitrary but have been unable to present convincing evidence linking the two types of lesions.  We have reviewed the histories of 20 patients with cavernous malformations and have analyzed the clinical, radiographic, and surgical-autopsy data associated with these lesions.  In some patients, multiple lesions, including cavernous malformations, capillary telangiectases, and transitional forms between the two, were identified.  Based on this analysis, we conclude that capillary telangiectasia and cavernous malformations represent two pathological extremes within the same vascular malformation category and propose grouping them as a single cerebral entity called cerebral capillary malformations.
Depression after acute myocardial infarction. The role of primary care physicians in rehabilitation.  Depression is a common problem after myocardial infarction.  Diagnosis is facilitated by use of the criteria for depression in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders and self-rating questionnaires.  Treatment may involve both psychological and pharmacologic interventions.  The patient's medical status must be carefully assessed before administration of antidepressant medication.  All antidepressants are contraindicated immediately after myocardial infarction.  When signs and symptoms of depression are exhibited early in the recovery phase, alprazolam (Xanax) may offer advantages over more traditional antidepressants.  Further research is necessary to determine the safety of newer antidepressants.
US-assisted aspiration thrombectomy: in vitro investigations.  The authors describe the use of a new ultrasound (US)-aspiration thrombectomy technique.  An oscillating US probe was inserted into a thin-walled, large-bore aspiration catheter.  Experiments tested the ability of the new device and other catheter combinations to remove clot material from a Petri dish, as well as from small and large vessel models made of silicone and glass tubes, respectively.  Results of the experiments demonstrated that an oscillating 1.0-mm US probe inserted into an aspiration catheter (7-9 F in diameter) promoted clot fragmentation and allowed continuous aspiration of thrombi of any size.  When compared with simple large-bore catheter aspiration and with mechanical fragmentation by means of a US probe within a catheter that was flushed to cool the probe, US-assisted aspiration thrombectomy demonstrated significantly better results for percutaneous transcatheter removal of fresh thrombi.
Renal vein renins: inability to predict response to revascularization in patients with hypertension.  To determine whether the captopril-stimulated renal vein renin ratio (CSRVRR) could enable identification of patients with hemodynamically significant renovascular lesions who would respond to revascularization, the authors measured CSRVRRs in 143 consecutive patients with hypertension who had been selected because of clinical features suggestive of renovascular hypertension.  All patients underwent conventional renal arteriography.  Renovascular hypertension was the final diagnosis if revascularization resulted in cure or improvement in blood pressure.  Complete data were available for 133 patients.  Twenty patients had renovascular hypertension; CSRVRR was greater than 1.5 in 13 of these 20 patients (sensitivity, 65%).  However, it was also greater than 1.5 in 54 of the 113 patients without renovascular hypertension (false-positive rate, 47.8%).  The positive predictive value of CSRVRR was 18.6%; the negative predictive value, 89.3%.  It is concluded that CSRVRR is not sufficiently sensitive to enable prediction of which patients will respond to revascularization and is not specific enough to exclude patients who do not have renovascular hypertension.
Patient evaluation for cardiac transplantation.  The aim for cardiac transplantation is to improve the quality of life and the survival in patients with end-stage heart failure.  Given the scarcity of donor organ availability, the expense of the transplantation process and follow-up care, as well as the tremendous emotional burden the process places on a patient and his/her family, it is essential to carefully screen potential candidates for their symptomatic, functional, hemodynamic, and psychosocial eligibility, and to rule out coexisting hemodynamic or comorbid conditions that would jeopardize successful transplantation and immunosuppression.  Comprehensive screening of potential transplant candidates, which is best accomplished by a multidisciplinary team approach working closely with patients and their families, is essential to insure that maximum benefit is derived from this scarce and valuable resource.
Electrocardiographic subset analysis of diltiazem administration on long-term outcome after acute myocardial infarction. The Multicenter Diltiazem Post-Infarction Trial Research Group.  The effect of diltiazem on long-term outcome after acute myocardial infarction (AMI) was assessed in 2,377 patients enrolled in the Multicenter Diltiazem Post-Infarction Trial and subsequently followed for 25 +/- 8 months.  The study population included 855 patients (36%) with at least 1 prior AMI before the index infarction and 1,522 patients (64%) with a first AMI, of whom 409 (27%) had a first non-Q-wave AMI, 664 (44%) a first inferior Q-wave AMI, and 449 (30%) a first anterior Q-wave AMI.  This post hoc analysis revealed that, among patients with first non-Q-wave and first inferior Q-wave AMI, there were fewer cardiac events during follow-up in the diltiazem than in the placebo group, and that the reverse was true for patients with first anterior Q-wave AMI or prior infarction.  The diltiazem:placebo Cox hazard ratio (95% confidence limits) for the trial primary end point (cardiac death or nonfatal reinfarction, whichever occurred first) was: first non-Q-wave AMI-0.48 (0.26, 0.89); first inferior Q-wave AMI-0.66 (0.40, 1.09); first anterior Q-wave AMI-0.82 (0.51, 1.31); and prior AMI-1.11 (0.85, 1.44).  Use of cardiac death alone as an end point gave an even more sharply focused treatment difference: first non-Q-wave AMI-0.46 (0.18, 1.21); first inferior Q-wave AMI-0.53 (0.27, 1.06); first anterior Q-wave AMI-1.28 (0.68, 2.40); prior infarction-1.26 (0.90, 1.77).  Further analysis revealed that these differences in the effect of diltiazem in large part reflected the different status of the 4 electrocardiographically defined subsets in terms of left ventricular function.
Exercise echocardiography and technetium-99m MIBI single-photon emission computed tomography in the detection of coronary artery disease.  To compare the relative diagnostic value of exercise echocardiography with perfusion technetium-99m metoxyisobutylisonitrile single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) in detecting coronary artery disease (CAD), 75 patients with suspected CAD but a normal electrocardiogram (ECG) at rest were included in a prospective correlative study.  Both the exercise echocardiograms and SPECT studies were performed in conjunction with the same symptom-limited bicycle exercise test.  The development of either a new wall motion abnormality or a reversible perfusion defect after exercise, or both, were regarded as a positive test for the exercise echocardiographic and SPECT studies, respectively.  The results of these 2 diagnostic tests were compared with coronary arteriography.  Exercise echocardiography identified 35 (71%) and SPECT 41 (84%, p = 0.13) of the 49 patients with significant CAD (defined as greater than 50% diameter stenosis).  Twenty-five of the 26 patients (96%) without significant coronary stenosis had negative exercise echocardiographic results and 23 of 26 (88%) had negative SPECT results.  Exercise-induced new wall motion abnormalities showed a good correlation with reversible perfusion defects, and the results of the 2 methods were concordant in 65 of 75 patients (agreement = 88%, kappa = 0.75 +/- 0.14).  Both the diagnostic accuracy of exercise echocardiography and SPECT were significantly higher than the exercise ECG (81 vs 64%, p less than 0.02 and 88 vs 64%, p less than 0.005).  The sensitivity and specificity for detecting individual diseased vessels were 60 and 95% for exercise echocardiography and 67 and 94% for SPECT.
Impaired left ventricular filling and regional diastolic asynchrony at rest in coronary artery disease and relation to exercise-induced myocardial ischemia.  Impaired left ventricular (LV) diastolic filling at rest is frequently observed in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) who have normal LV systolic function and no previous infarction.  To test the hypothesis that abnormal diastolic function at rest might reflect the functional severity of CAD, as estimated by exercise-induced ischemia, the relation between regional and global LV diastolic function at rest and during exercise-induced ischemia was evaluated in 49 patients with radionuclide angiography.  All patients had normal systolic function at rest.  Group 1 (n = 26) patients manifested a normal ejection fraction response to exercise and group 2 (n = 23) patients an abnormal response.  Data obtained from 22 age-comparable normal volunteers were used for comparison.  Although regional and global diastolic function were not different between normal subjects and group 1 patients, peak filling rate was lower in group 2 patients than in normal subjects (2.5 +/- 0.8 vs 3.2 +/- 0.6 end-diastolic counts/s; p less than 0.01).  Moreover, regional diastolic asynchrony, as assessed from the radionuclide data by using a regional sector analysis of the LV region of interest, was greater in group 2 patients (46 +/- 44 ms) than in both normal subjects (25 +/- 16 ms; p less than 0.05) and group 1 patients (23 +/- 16 ms; p less than 0.05).  Thus, among patients with CAD and with normal LV systolic function at rest, impaired LV filling and regional asynchrony predict a greater degree of exercise-induced ischemia, suggesting a greater extent of jeopardized myocardium.
Predictors of cardiac survival after percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty in patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction.  To assess the outcome of percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) in patients with severe left ventricular (LV) dysfunction and to determine the predictors of mortality, 73 patients with LV ejection fraction less than or equal to 40% who underwent initial PTCA were analyzed.  The majority of patients had prior (greater than 1 week) myocardial infarction (62 patients, 85%).  Congestive heart failure and unstable angina were present in 24 (45%) and 49 (67%) patients, respectively.  Multivessel coronary artery disease was present in 60 (83%).  The LV ejection fraction ranged from 14 to 40% (mean 34%).  Intraaortic balloon pump (15%) and percutaneous cardiopulmonary bypass support (4%) was used infrequently.  Angiographic success was obtained in 109 of 128 lesions (85%) attempted.  Complete revascularization was obtained in 16 of 60 patients with clinical success.  Procedure-related mortality was 5% (4 patients).  All patients were followed from greater than or equal to 6 to less than or equal to 71 months (average 26).  The estimated survival was 79 +/- 5%, 74 +/- 6%, 66 +/- 7% and 57 +/- 8% at 1, 2, 3 and 4 years, respectively.  A Cox regression analysis revealed that the presence of congestive heart failure, a lower LV ejection fraction and a higher myocardial jeopardy score for contractile myocardium were independent predictors of survival after PTCA in patients with LV dysfunction.  In conclusion, a high-risk subset can be identified among patients with severe LV dysfunction who undergo PTCA.
Comparison of left ventricular ejection fraction by magnetic resonance imaging and radionuclide ventriculography in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.  To assess the validity of gated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in determining left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF), MRI (Spin Echo, multislice-multiphase technique on the short-axis plane) was compared with equilibrium radionuclide ventriculography in 32 patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.  All patients underwent MRI and radionuclide ventriculography, performed consecutively on the same day (mean time interval between the 2 examinations: 40 minutes).  Comparison with LVEF showed a high correlation (y = 0.79 X +3.51, r = 0.91; p less than 0.001).  Mean difference between radionuclide ventriculography and MRI data was 1.7, with the 95% confidence interval 0.71 to 2.68: MRI slightly underestimated LVEF.  MRI interobserver and intrapatient variability (assessed in 15 of 32 patients) showed a high correlation (r = 0.91, r = 0.98).  In conclusion, data suggest that MRI, using the short-axis approach and the multislice-multiphase technique, is an accurate, noninvasive, highly reproducible method of evaluating LVEF in patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.
Stroke volume during submaximal exercise in endurance-trained normotensive subjects and in untrained hypertensive subjects with beta blockade (propranolol and pindolol).  The effect of beta-adrenergic blockade on stroke volume (SV) at increasing submaximal exercise intensities was studied in 12 endurance-trained normotensive and 12 untrained hypertensive (diastolic blood pressure greater than 95 mm Hg) men, aged 18 to 34 years.  Subjects were assigned to each of 3 treatments in a double-blind, randomized order: placebo, propranolol (80 mg twice daily) and pindolol (10 mg twice daily) for 10 days, with a period of 48 to 60 hours from the initial dose to the first treadmill test and a 4-day washout period between drugs.  Cardiac output was measured using the carbon dioxide rebreathing method and SV was calculated from cardiac output and heart rate as follows: SV = cardiac output/heart rate.  Cardiac outputs were estimated at rest and while walking on a treadmill at 25, 45, 60 and 75% of the subject's previously determined maximal oxygen uptake (VO2max).  No significant differences were found in cardiac output between either of the drugs and placebo at rest, or at any of the 4 rates of work.  Propranolol significantly increased SV above placebo values (p less than 0.05) for both trained and untrained groups at the intensities of 45, 60 and 75%.  Significant differences in SV were found between pindolol and placebo only at the intensities of 60 and 75% in the trained group.  Contrary to expectations, SV showed no indication of a plateau with propranolol in the trained subjects throughout the 4 different exercise intensities, whereas a plateau was established under placebo conditions by 45% of VO2max in both trained and untrained subjects.  These results suggest that both trained and untrained hypertensive persons can exercise with beta-adrenergic blockade at submaximal levels without compromised cardiac function.
Hypertension, endothelium, and cardiovascular risk factors.  The functions of the endothelium and the effects of hypertension, atherosclerosis, and diabetes on the endothelium are reviewed.  The endothelium affects vascular tone by releasing vasodilators and modulating the effects of vasoactive substances such as catecholamines, bradykinin, serotonin, and angiotensin II.  Relaxation of vascular smooth muscle depends upon a functionally intact endothelium and the release of the endothelium-derived relaxing factor nitric oxide.  Endothelial cells also appear to release a hyperpolarizing factor that relaxes smooth muscle through activation of the sodium-potassium pump, and of the endothelium-dependent contracting factors.  Similarities are found in the vascular injury resulting from hypertension, atherosclerosis, and diabetes.  When these risk factors coexist, they can act synergistically and magnify the vascular injury.  The endothelium appears to be one of the major targets for these forms of injury.  Future therapeutic strategies will focus on ways to prevent, arrest, or reverse endothelial injury.
Cardiovascular risk reduction: the role of antihypertensive treatment.  The effects of antihypertensive drugs on mortality from stroke, coronary artery disease (CAD), and nonvascular causes have been studied in 14 trials involving more than 37,000 patients.  In the treated patients, blood pressure was 5 to 6 mm Hg lower than that in placebo-treated patients, and whereas mortality from stroke was reduced by 42%, CAD mortality was reduced by only 14%.  A major reason for this lack of effect on CAD mortality is apparently the adverse effects of the primary drugs used in these trials (diuretics and beta blockers) on glucose tolerance, lipid levels, and insulin resistance.  The angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors favorably influence many CAD risk factors, and their use can be expected to reduce CAD mortality in patients treated for hypertension.
The tangled web of coronary risk factors.  Although epidemiologic, genetic, and pathophysiologic studies have shown that low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) are involved in the development of coronary artery disease, the standard measurement of LDL cholesterol comprises a number of separate components that may contribute in different ways to the disease process.  Some of these components appear to be of particular pathologic importance.  Intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDLs) and lipoprotein (a) are highly atherogenic species that each normally account for up to 10% to 15% total LDL cholesterol but may be disproportionately elevated in pathologic states and may therefore contribute disproportionately to coronary disease risk in certain patients.  Recently, another subclass of LDL, characterized by relatively small particle size and increased density, also has been found to be associated with relatively increased risk of coronary disease.  Furthermore, levels of this subclass, designated LDL-III, are linked to a number of interrelated hormonal and metabolic factors, each of which have also been associated with risk of coronary artery disease.  These include male gender, postmenopause, abdominal adiposity, elevated triglyceride levels, increased levels of apolipoprotein B, and reductions in high-density lipoproteins (HDLs), particularly in the HDL2 subclass.  Other studies have demonstrated that many of these factors are also commonly associated with relative insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia.  Thus, a lipoprotein profile characterized by a relative increase in LDL-III and a reduction in HDL2 is indicative of a constellation of metabolic features that defines a high-risk state and that makes it extremely difficult to single out one or more factors that are most directly involved in the disease process.  Combinations of genetic and environmental factors acting on this "tangled web" of risk factors may account for much of the variation in coronary disease susceptibility found in the general population.
Regression of atherosclerosis: what does it mean?  Angiographic evidence of coronary artery atherosclerosis regression has been demonstrated in controlled clinical trials.  The significance of this regression appears to depend in a complex way on the degree of atherosclerosis present when a regression regimen is initiated.  Angiographic trials indicate that lesion change is a continuum, with a gradual transition from progression to stability and regression.  Divergent lesion change can be seen in the same patient with a progression of some lesions and a regression of others.  This makes it necessary to perform a comprehensive survey of all visible coronary segments when evaluating angiograms to determine the outcome of a clinical trial.  An important finding in clinical trials is that new lesion formation can be reduced.  This indicates that effective control of atherosclerosis may be possible with procedures now available, but noninvasive coronary artery imaging methods need to be refined.
Insulin resistance, hyperinsulinemia, and hypertriglyceridemia in the etiology and clinical course of hypertension.  Patients with untreated hypertension have been shown to be resistant to insulin-stimulated glucose uptake and are more hyperinsulinemic and hypertriglyceridemic than matched groups of patients with normal blood pressure.  In addition, insulin resistance, hyperinsulinemia, and hypertriglyceridemia have been demonstrated in spontaneous hypertensive rats and in Sprague-Dawley rats fed a fructose-enriched diet.  The defect in insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in these experimental models can also be shown at the cellular level.  Experimental interventions that prevent insulin resistance or hyperinsulinemia from developing in fructose-fed rats also greatly attenuate the increase in blood pressure.  Since endogenous hyperinsulinemia and hypertriglyceridemia have been identified as factors that increase the risk of coronary artery disease (CAD), it is likely that they contribute to the increased prevalence of CAD in hypertensive patients.  Antihypertensive treatment may have exacerbated these metabolic abnormalities, which could help explain why it has been difficult to show that lowering blood pressure decreases the risk of CAD.  These observations raise the possibility that abnormalities of carbohydrate and lipoprotein metabolism may play a role in both the etiology and clinical course of hypertension.
New horizons in the treatment of coronary artery thrombosis.  The application of recombinant DNA methodology to clinical medicine offers the clinician a new generation of more potent and specific therapies.  Recombinant methods offer great promise in the treatment of coronary artery thrombosis.  This review focuses on the characterization of 1) molecules that activate plasminogen locally (in the vicinity of a thrombus) rather than systemically, and 2) molecules that offer new approaches to the inhibition of platelet activation and thrombin activity.  We first describe the methods used to uncover these molecules and their characterization at the molecular level.  The ways in which this knowledge can lead to the development of agents tailored to clinical needs are then explored.
Influence of desflurane on regional distribution of coronary blood flow in a chronically instrumented canine model of multivessel coronary artery obstruction.  The influence of desflurane on myocardial perfusion measured by a microsphere technique during a total occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary artery and concomitant moderate or severe stenosis of the left circumflex coronary artery was evaluated in chronically instrumented dogs.  Hemodynamics, regional contractile function, and myocardial blood flow were measured during the conscious state and after anesthesia with desflurane (8.2%-9.2% and 12.5%-12.7%) with and without control of arterial pressure.  Total left anterior descending occlusion produced in combination with a left circumflex coronary artery stenosis significantly (P less than 0.05) increased heart rate and left ventricular end diastolic pressure in the absence of desflurane anesthesia.  Desflurane, administered only in the presence of left anterior descending occlusion and left circumflex stenosis, significantly (P less than 0.05) decreased mean arterial pressure, left ventricular systolic pressure, and left ventricular positive dP/dt50 without change in heart rate.  Blood flow to the subendocardium of normal myocardium was reduced during the high concentration of desflurane (P less than 0.05), but perfusion of the subepicardium and midmyocardium was maintained at conscious levels.  When the left circumflex stenosis was of moderate severity, only blood flow to the subendocardium distal to the stenosis was reduced by desflurane (P less than 0.05).  In the presence of a severe stenosis, perfusion was decreased in the subepicardium, midmyocardium, and subendocardium of the stenotic zone (P less than 0.05).  During the reduction in arterial pressure produced by desflurane, collateral blood flow in the left anterior descending region was reduced in dogs with either a moderate or severe left circumflex stenosis (P less than 0.05).  When arterial pressure and heart rate conditions observed in the postocclusion conscious state were restored during the high concentration of desflurane, myocardial blood flow in all regions returned to those levels present in the conscious state (P less than 0.05).  Ratios of flow between occluded and normal zones were decreased when hypotension produced by desflurane was uncontrolled, but when arterial pressure and heart rate were adjusted to conscious postocclusion levels using partial thoracic aorta occlusion and atrial pacing, the ratio remained at conscious control levels regardless of the degree of left circumflex stenosis severity (P less than 0.05).  Results of this investigation indicate that desflurane does not redistribute blood flow away from collateral-dependent myocardium to other regions via a "coronary steal" mechanism in a chronically instrumented canine model of multivessel coronary artery disease.
Narrow QRS ventricular tachycardia.  OBJECTIVE: To determine the frequency and clinical characteristics of narrow QRS ventricular tachycardia (QRS duration less than or equal to 0.11 seconds).  DESIGN: Consecutive survey of patients with ventricular tachycardia.  SETTING: Tertiary, referral-based arrhythmia service at a university medical center.  PATIENTS: Sequential sample of patients with inducible ventricular tachycardia who had a 12-lead electrocardiogram of the tachycardia available for review.  MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Of 106 patients with ventricular tachycardia, 5 (4.7%; 95% CI, 2.1% to 10.6%) had ventricular tachycardia with a QRS duration less than or equal to 0.11 seconds.  Three of the five patients were previously incorrectly diagnosed as having supraventricular tachycardia.  All five patients had at least two electrocardiographic findings other than QRS duration to suggest ventricular tachycardia.  CONCLUSIONS: Narrow QRS ventricular tachycardia should be considered in the differential diagnosis of narrow QRS tachycardias.  Electrocardiographic findings other than QRS duration are usually present to suggest the diagnosis.
Increased plasma endothelin-1 in pulmonary hypertension: marker or mediator of disease?  OBJECTIVE: To explore the role of endothelin-1, a potent endothelial-derived vasoconstrictor peptide, in pulmonary hypertension, by measuring its concentration in arterial and venous plasma.  DESIGN: A survey, case series study.  SETTING: University-affiliated hospitals and outpatient clinics.  PATIENTS: Twenty-seven patients with pulmonary hypertension: 7 with primary, and 20 with secondary pulmonary hypertension of various causes.  The control groups (n = 16) comprised 8 healthy volunteers and 8 patients with coronary artery disease but without evidence of pulmonary hypertension.  MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Pulmonary artery pressure was markedly increased (94/43 +/- 23/13 mm Hg) in the patients with pulmonary hypertension.  Venous plasma immunoreactive endothelin-1, measured by a specific radioimmunoassay, was significantly higher in patients with pulmonary hypertension (3.5 +/- 2.5 pg/mL, P less than 0.001) than in normal subjects (1.45 +/- 0.45 pg/mL), or patients with coronary disease (0.75 +/- 0.64 pg/mL).  The arterial-to-venous ratio of immunoreactive endothelin-1 was significantly greater than unity in primary pulmonary hypertension (2.21 +/- 0.72, P = 0.01), whereas the patients with secondary pulmonary hypertension had a mean ratio not different from 1 (0.97 +/- 0.42).  In contrast, the mean arterial-to-venous ratios were significantly less than unity in both control groups (0.59 +/- 0.35, and 0.54 +/- 0.64; P less than 0.02, for normal subjects and coronary disease patients, respectively), indicating a possible clearance of endothelin-1 across the healthy lung.  CONCLUSIONS: Patient with pulmonary hypertension have substantial alterations in plasma immunoreactive endothelin-1, which may reflect changes in net release or clearance of endothelin-1 by the lung.  In patients with primary pulmonary hypertension, the high levels in arterial compared with venous plasma suggest pulmonary production of endothelin-1, which may contribute to elevated pulmonary vascular resistance.
Evaluation of drug therapy for treatment of hypertensive urgencies in the emergency department.  Oral nifedipine (N) and clonidine (C) are often used in the treatment of hypertensive urgencies; however, until recently, there were no comparative studies using the same patient population.  The authors reviewed the records of hypertensive patients treated in the emergency department between October 1, 1987 and September 30, 1988.  Selected patients had a diastolic blood pressure (DBP) of greater than 115 mm Hg without evidence of acute end organ damage.  Patients were stratified into three treatment groups: N, C, and group 3 (G3).  G3 received a variety of drug therapies but not exclusively N or C.  Systolic blood pressure (SBP), DBP, mean arterial pressure (MAP), percent decrease in MAP (%MAP), time to lower blood pressure, admissions, and discharges were evaluated.  Efficacy and safety were defined as reaching a DBP less than 110 mm Hg but %MAP of no greater than either 25% or 40%, respectively.  Thirty-five N, 32 C, and 27 G3 patients were identified with no statistical difference between groups in race, gender, pretreatment SBP, DBP, or MAP.  N, C, and G3 significantly reduced SBP, DBP, and MAP (P less than .01).  Comparing N, C, and G3, no differences were observed in %MAP, admissions, discharges, efficacy, or safety.  Time required to decrease blood pressure differed between all three groups (44 +/- 32 N v 77 +/- 57 C v 152 +/- 94 min G3) (p less than .05).  These results indicate that N, C, and a variety of drug therapies are equally effective and safe in the treatment of hypertensive urgencies.
Experience with esmolol for the treatment of cocaine-associated cardiovascular complications.  The authors report their experience using esmolol, an ultra-short acting beta-adrenergic antagonist, for the treatment of seven patients with cocaine-associated cardiovascular complications.  No consistent hemodynamic benefit was found with the use of this drug.  Although there was a decline in mean heart rate of 23% (range 0% to 35%), they were unable to show a consistent antihypertensive response.  Adverse effects occurred in three patients.  This included one patient with a marked exacerbation of hypertension and one who became hypotensive.  Another patient developed emesis and lethargy during esmolol therapy and required endotracheal intubation.  They do not recommend the routine use of esmolol for cocaine cardiotoxicity.
High resolution real-time ultrasound for the diagnosis of venous thrombosis in the rehabilitation setting.  Accurate, noninvasive testing for deep venous thrombosis (DVT) by conventional methods is often not possible in the rehabilitation patient.  Lower extremity amputation, a cast or bandage, or skin problems present obstacles to standard diagnostic methods.  This report describes the use of duplex ultrasound (US) scanning for noninvasive diagnosis of DVT in a seventy-year-old man with a below-knee amputation, on whom Doppler and plethysmography examinations could not be performed.  As experience is gained with this technique, the use of venography for diagnosis of DVT becomes more difficult to rationalize.
Retinal arterial macroaneurysms: risk factors and natural history.  A case control study was conducted to identify the systemic and ocular risk factors for retinal arterial macroaneurysms.  Forty-three patients with 52 photographically confirmed macroaneurysms were located.  Forty-three age-matched, race-matched concurrent control patients were also identified.  The patients with macroaneurysms had decreased visual acuity (p less than 0.0001) and a higher prevalence of hypertension (p = 0.037), female sex (p = 0.099), and retinal vein occlusions (p = 0.055) than controls.  In patients with both a macroaneurysm and venous occlusion there was a 12.0 times higher prevalence of macroaneurysms in the area of retina drained by the occluded vein (p less than 0.05).  Common findings associated with macroaneurysms included retinal haemorrhage (81% of patients), retinal exudate (70%), vitreous haemorrhage (30%), macular involvement (30%), and distal arteriolar narrowing (26%).  Arteriolar occlusion occurred spontaneously (8%) or after laser photocoagulation (16%).
Hirudin interruption of heparin-resistant arterial thrombus formation in baboons.  To determine the role of thrombin in high blood flow, platelet-dependent thrombotic and hemostatic processes we measured the relative antithrombotic and antihemostatic effects in baboons of hirudin, a highly potent and specific antithrombin, and compared the effects of heparin, an antithrombin III-dependent inhibitor of thrombin.  Thrombus formation was determined in vivo using three relevant models (homologous endarterectomized aorta, collagen-coated tubing, and Dacron vascular graft) by measuring: (1) platelet deposition, using gamma camera imaging of 111In-platelets; (2) fibrin deposition, as assessed by the incorporation of circulating 125I-fibrinogen; and (3) occlusion.  The continuous intravenous infusion of 1, 5, and 20 nmol/kg per minute of recombinant hirudin (desulfatohirudin) maintained constant plasma levels of 0.16 +/- 0.03, 0.79 +/- 0.44, and 3.3 +/- 0.77 mumol/mL, respectively.  Hirudin interrupted platelet and fibrin deposition in a dose-dependent manner that was profound at the highest dose for all three thrombogenic surfaces and significant at the lowest dose for thrombus formation on endarterectomized aorta.  Thrombotic occlusion was prevented by all doses studied.  In contrast, heparin did not inhibit either platelet or fibrin deposition when administered at a dose that maximally prolonged clotting times (100 U/kg) (P greater than .1), and only intermediate effects were produced at 10-fold that dose (1,000 U/kg).  Moreover, heparin did not prevent occlusion of the test segments.  Hirudin inhibited platelet hemostatic function in concert with its antithrombotic effects (bleeding times were prolonged by the intermediate and higher doses).  By comparison, intravenous heparin failed to affect the bleeding time at the 100 U/kg dose (P greater than .5), and only minimally prolonged the bleeding time at the 1,000 U/kg dose (P less than .05).  We conclude that platelet-dependent thrombotic and hemostatic processes are thrombin-mediated and that the biologic antithrombin hirudin produces a potent, dose-dependent inhibition of arterial thrombus formation that greatly exceeds the minimal antithrombotic effects produced by heparin.
Serum sialic acid concentration and cardiovascular mortality   OBJECTIVE--To determine whether serum sialic acid concentration may be used to predict short and long term cardiovascular mortality.  DESIGN--Prospective study on all men and women who had their serum sialic acid concentration measured as part of a general health survey in 1964 or in 1965.  All were followed up for an average of 20.5 years.  SETTING--Geographical part of the county of Varmland, Sweden.  SUBJECTS--Residents in the area participating in a health check up in 1964-5 (27,065 men and 28,037 women), of whom 372 men (169 with incomplete data and 203 lost to follow up) and 345 women (143 and 202 respectively) were excluded; thus 26,693 men and 27,692 women entered the study.  The study sample was restricted to subjects aged 40-74 during any of the 20 years' follow up.  MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES--Serum sialic acid concentration, serum cholesterol concentration, diastolic blood pressure, body mass index at the general health survey visit; cardiovascular and non-cardiovascular deaths during three periods of follow up (0-6 years, 7-13 years, and 14-20 years), according to the Swedish mortality register, in subjects aged 45-74.  RESULTS--Mean serum sialic acid concentration (mg/100 ml) was 68.8 (SD 8.0) for men and 69.2 (8.0) for women; the average concentration increasing with age in both sexes.  A total of 5639 (21%) men and 3307 (12%) women died during the follow up period, in whom death in 3052 (54%) men and 1368 (41%) women was from cardiovascular causes.  During short (0-6 years), medium (7-13 years), and long (14-20 years) term follow up the relative risk of death from cardiovascular disease increased with increasing serum sialic acid concentration.  The relative risk (95% confidence interval) associated with the highest quartile of sialic acid concentration compared with the lowest quartile was 2.38 (2.01 to 2.83) in men and 2.62 (1.93 to 3.57) in women.  Similar results were found for deaths from non-cardiovascular disease with relative risks of 1.50 (1.34 to 2.68) in men and 1.89 (1.57 to 2.28) in women, but these relative risks were significantly lower than those for deaths from cardiovascular disease (p less than 0.001 and p less than 0.005 respectively).  In multivariate analysis of total mortality and of cardiovascular mortality with sialic acid concentration, serum cholesterol concentration, diastolic blood pressure, and body mass index as independent variables the impact of sialic acid concentration was virtually the same as in univariate analysis.  CONCLUSION--Serum sialic acid concentration is a strong predictor of cardiovascular mortality.  A possible explanation of these findings is that the serum sialic acid concentration may reflect the existence or the activity of an atherosclerotic process, and this may warrant further investigation.
Comparison of exercise performance in left main and three-vessel coronary artery disease.  From a consecutive series of patients who underwent rest and exercise radionuclide angiography over several years, we retrospectively identified 34 patients with left main coronary artery disease and 103 patients with three-vessel coronary artery disease who did not have significant left main disease.  The results of gated equilibrium radionuclide angiography were compared in these 2 groups.  Multiple exercise hemodynamic, exercise electrocardiographic, and exercise radionuclide angiographic parameters were considered in an attempt to separate the 2 groups.  The only parameter that was significantly different between the 2 groups was exercise heart rate.  However, no value of the exercise heart rate could meaningfully separate the 2 groups.  Despite their known difference in prognosis, patients with left main and three-vessel disease had very similar exercise performance and could not be distinguished from one another by exercise electrocardiography or exercise radionuclide angiography.  The inability to distinguish these two groups is a clear limitation of noninvasive exercise modalities.
Atrial septal occlusion improves the accuracy of mitral valve area determination following percutaneous mitral balloon valvotomy.  We investigated the impact of the atrial communication on the mitral valve area calculation after percutaneous mitral balloon valvotomy in 17 patients (15 women, 2 men; mean age 56 +/- 4 years).  The hemodynamic measurements and mitral valve area calculations were performed with and without balloon occlusion of the atrial septal puncture site.  The mitral valve area determined with balloon occlusion was significantly smaller than the mitral valve area determined without occlusion (1.6 +/- 0.1 vs.  1.9 +/- 0.1 cm2, P less than 0.01), and was similar to the echocardiographically determined valve area (1.6 +/- 0.1 cm2).  This decrease in the calculated mitral valve area with occlusion was associated with a decrease in the measured cardiac output, without a change in the mitral valve gradient or the diastolic filling period.  Occlusion of the atrial septal puncture site may permit more accurate determination of the mitral valve area and thus provide a better reference point for future comparison should the question or restenosis arise.
Preservation of regional myocardial function during coronary angioplasty with an autoperfusion balloon catheter: a case report.  Echocardiographic assessment of regional myocardial function was performed during standard balloon coronary angioplasty followed by autoperfusion balloon angioplasty of a proximal left anterior descending artery stenosis.  Septal and apical akinesis occurred within 60 seconds of standard balloon inflation, but regional function was well preserved during prolonged autoperfusion balloon inflation.
Successful mitral valvuloplasty using the Inoue balloon in a patient with mitral stenosis associated with subvalvular fibrosis and reduced left ventricular inflow cavity: a case report.  Percutaneous transvenous mitral valvuloplasty (PTMV) was performed with two cylindric pigtail balloon catheters in a 52-year-old woman with symptomatic mitral stenosis.  The subvalvular apparatus was fibrous with welded chordae and the subvalvular left ventricular space was markedly reduced.  As a result of this distorted anatomy, during the inflations, the two balloons constantly slipped back into the left atrium before full inflation was obtained.  After the procedure, the mitral valve area (MVA), as estimated by echo-doppler (ED), increased from 1.00 to 1.34 cm2.  After 2 months of mild clinical improvement, the patient again became symptomatic and ED examination showed a MVA of 1.25 cm2.  A second PTMV was performed with an Inoue balloon, the entire procedure taking less than 1 hour.  A stable position of the Inoue balloon and complete dilatation were achieved.  ED examination showed a mitral valve area of 2.30 cm2.  There was no mitral regurgitation nor atrial septal defect.  After 3 months, she has only N.Y.H.A.  class I symptoms and MVA, as estimated by ED, was 2.40 cm2.
Percutaneous right brachial artery approach with 5F catheters for studying coronary artery disease.  We prospectively studied 60 ischemic patients with 5F catheters (Pigtail and Amplatz) using the percutaneous right brachial artery approach (group I), in order to compare this technique with two groups of 100 patients each randomly studied by the femoral route with either 5F (group II) or 8F (group III) catheters (Pigtail and Judkins).  The following parameters were analyzed: need to change the initially elected catheter diameter or/and artery approach; technical difficulty for obtaining LV, LCA, and RCA angiograms; total time of X-ray exposure; quality image of LV, LCA, and RCA angiograms; incidence of arterial puncture related hematomas or total arterial occlusion; and duration of local compression after sheath removal.  There were no differences between 5F brachial and femoral approaches except for the arterial compression time (p less than 0.01) and the X-ray exposure time (p = 0.03) which were longer with the brachial approach.  Whatever the route used, 5F showed a mild increase difficulty (brachial p = 0.001; femoral p = 0.01) and a mild decreased quality image for LCA (branchial p = 0.006; femoral p less than 0.05).  Mild hematomas were more frequent with 8F catheters (p less than 0.05).  The procedure could be completed by the elected first artery and type of catheter (5F or 8F) in 57/60 patients in group I, in 95/100 in group II, and in 96/100 in group III (nonsignificant differences).  Thus, the percutaneous right brachial artery approach using 5F catheters is similar to the femoral artery approach with the same catheters.  Although both of them showed a mild increased technical difficulty and a mild decreased quality image compared to 8F, mainly for LCA angiograms, they allowed complete and reliable angiograms reading and analysis.
Accuracy and reproducibility of quantitative coronary arteriography using 6 and 8 French catheters with cine angiographic acquisition.  To determine the suitability of 6 French catheters for quantitative coronary arteriography, the relative accuracy and reproducibility of one type of these catheters was compared to that obtained with standard 8 French catheters in 20 stenoses.  Duplicate injections with polyurethane 6 French catheters were obtained using hand and power injection technique with cineangiographic acquisition (four 6 French catheter injections total per stenosis).  Measurements of both percent diameter stenosis and absolute dimensions were compared to those obtained with hand injection and cine acquisition using 8 French catheters as a "gold standard." While the reproducibility of dimension determination with the 6 French catheter was generally similar to that obtained with the 8 French catheter (0.27 +/- 0.23 mm for absolute diameter and 8.1 +/- 7.4% for percent diameter stenosis), accuracy was significantly less for the 6 French catheter for measurement of absolute dimensions.  Thus, while apparently well suited for serial measurements of the same stenoses, 6 French catheters may not be as accurate in the determination of absolute artery dimensions as 8 French catheters.
Coronary balloon angioplasty through diagnostic 6 French catheters.  We investigated the use of ultralow profile balloon catheters (Scimed ACE, USCI Probe, Cordis, Orion) for coronary angioplasty through 6 French diagnostic catheters (Schneider, Cordis).  Contrast injection was assisted with a Hercules pump (Cordis) in all cases.  During 21 procedures, angioplasty of 27 lesions in 20 selected patients was attempted (1.3 lesion/procedure).  Twelve lesions were in the right, 10 in the left anterior descending, and 5 in the left circumflex coronary artery.  Balloon size varied between 2.5 and 3.5 mm.  Twenty lesions could be successfully dilated (74%) through the 6 French catheter and 7 lesions required an exchange to a 7 French angioplasty guiding catheter.  For 5 cases, another balloon was also necessary to complete the procedure.  The final overall success rate was 100% per patient and per lesion and there were no major complications.  Despite the small internal catheter lumen (1.22 mm) coronary visualization was adequate, and mechanical support was good.  Failures of 6 French catheters were attributed to insufficient torque control and excessive friction when the balloon crossed the tapered end of the diagnostic catheter.  Coronary angioplasty through a diagnostic 6 French catheter is feasible and may represent a reasonable alternative for simple cases that are done during the same session as the diagnostic angiography.  Once available, 6 French high flow angioplasty guiding catheters without a tapered tip should improve success while retaining the advantage of a small femoral puncture site.
Preliminary experience with 5 and 6 French diagnostic catheters as guiding catheters for coronary angioplasty.  With the reduction in profile of balloon dilation catheters, until recently, it has been the internal dimensions and performance of the guiding catheter that has mandated the use of 7, 8 or 9 French (F) systems for the performance of percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA).  A new 5F catheter design (Sherwood Medical Co., St.  Louis, MO) provided a large inner lumen (0.4") permitting use of 0.20-0.22" fixed-wire PTCA balloon catheters with good coronary visualization.  Potential advantages include reduced coronary artery ostial trauma and catheter induced damping and enhanced patient comfort.  We report our initial experience in 14 patients undergoing PTCA with a 5 and 6F guide/fixed-wire system.  Mean age was 63 +/- 10 (43-78 years).  PTCA indications: Cardiogenic shock (1), post-myocardial infarction angina pectoris (2), grade III angina (5) and unstable angina pectoris (6).  Vessel attempted: Left anterior descending (3), circumflex (4), obtuse marginal (2), diagonal (1), right coronary artery (3), and internal thoracic artery (1).  Twelve patients had femoral approach; two brachial approach.  The USCI Probe (USCI Division, Billerica, MA) was used in 8 lesions and SCIMED ACE (SCIMED Life Systems, Maplegrove, MN) catheter in 7 lesions.  Successful 5 or 6F guide/fixed-wire dilations reduced the stenosis (77 +/- 14 to 37 +/- 30%) and were successfully performed in 79% (11/14).  One 5F patient required 8F guiding catheter and was dilated with 2.0 fixed-wire balloon.  A second failed 5F PTCA could not be dilated with any larger conventional system.  A third total occlusion could not be crossed with a guidewire or fixed wire balloon.  No patient had a complication.
Application of coronary angioplasty to the septal perforator arteries.  Significant coronary artery disease affecting the septal perforator arteries can cause anginal pain, rhythm disturbances, or septal infarction.  However, since these vessels are usually inaccessible to coronary bypass surgery, there is a tendency among angiographers and angioplasters to overlook lesions of the septal perforator arteries.  Our experience suggests that if medical treatment is not sufficient to treat clinical manifestations resulting from septal perforator disease, then coronary angioplasty can be considered a therapeutic alternative for revascularization.  We herein present 11 patients who underwent coronary angioplasty of a major septal artery and discuss angiographic and technical aspects of the procedure.
Cardiotoxicity of interferon. A review of 44 cases.  Cardiovascular complications have occurred in clinical trials of interferon.  We review herein experience to date of cardiotoxicity with all types of interferons in cancer patients.  The most common presentations of cardiotoxicity were cardiac arrhythmia, dilated cardiomyopathy, and symptoms of ischemic heart disease, including myocardial infarction and sudden death.  The cardiac effects were not related to the daily dose, cumulative total dose, or period of therapy.  Some of the patients in whom interferon has caused cardiovascular sequelae have had a history of coronary heart disease or have previously been given chemotherapy with drugs known to be cardiotoxic.  In most of the patients, cardiac toxicity was reversible following the cessation of the drug therapy.
Systemic to pulmonary bronchial blood flow in mitral stenosis.  We measured systemic to pulmonary bronchial blood flow [Qbr(s-p)] during total cardiopulmonary bypass in 15 patients with mitral stenosis and elevated pulmonary venous pressure (group A, mean pulmonary wedge pressure = 22.2 +/- 5.4 mm Hg, mean +/- SD) and in 15 patients with coronary artery diseases and normal pulmonary venous pressure (group B).  Qbr(s-p) is the volume of blood accumulating in the left side of the heart in the absence of pulmonary and coronary flows.  This blood was vented through a cannula introduced into the left atrium and measured.  Qbr(s-p) was 76.3 +/- 13.9 ml/min (2.18 +/- 0.37 percent of extracorporeal circulation pump flow) and 22.3 +/- 2.1 (0.63 +/- 0.15) in group A and B, respectively (p less than 0.01).  During total cardiopulmonary bypass, pulmonary venous pressure is approximately atmospheric pressure, and no differences in systemic blood pressure, extracorporeal circulation pump flow, and airways pressure were observed between group A and B.  Therefore, vascular resistance through the bronchial vessels draining into the pulmonary circulation is reduced in patients with mitral stenosis and elevated pulmonary venous pressure.
Catheter-induced tricuspid regurgitation. Incidence and clinical significance.  The incidence and severity of catheter-induced tricuspid regurgitation has not been studied extensively.  Given the frequency with which right heart catheters are employed to measure cardiac output, it is important to know whether the severity of catheter-induced tricuspid regurgitation is sufficient to invalidate the measurement of thermodilution cardiac output.  Accordingly, the purpose of the present prospective study was to determine the incidence and severity of catheter-induced tricuspid regurgitation in 25 men (mean age, 58.1 +/- 1.4 years) using Doppler ultrasound.  The tricuspid valve was interrogated from two orthogonal views using pulsed-wave and color flow Doppler, either in the presence or absence of a 7-French catheter across the tricuspid valve.  The severity of catheter-induced tricuspid regurgitation was graded semiquantitatively using a validated scoring system.  Pulsed-wave Doppler studies showed that the incidence of catheter-induced tricuspid regurgitation was 48 percent, and that the average tricuspid regurgitation score increased from 0.41 +/- 0.16 to 0.61 +/- 0.17 (p less than 0.01).  Color flow Doppler studies showed similar findings.  Further, the incidence of catheter-induced tricuspid regurgitation was not related to the patient's underlying hemodynamic status or right ventricular geometry.  In conclusion, this study shows for the first time that the quantitative extent of catheter-induced tricuspid regurgitation is small, and is therefore unlikely to be important clinically, particularly with regard to the assessment of thermodilution cardiac output.
Venous air embolism. Diagnosis by spontaneous right-sided contrast echocardiography.  This report describes the definitive diagnosis of venous air-embolism by documentation of spontaneous echo contrast in the right cardiac chambers following removal of a jugular venous catheter in a patient with hepatic failure.  This complication was potentiated by the presence of concurrent hepatic coagulopathy which prejudiced effective hemostasis at the central venous puncture site.
The effect of thromboxane synthetase inhibition on cardiopulmonary function during endotoxemia in sheep.  The early pulmonary hypertension seen with endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide) has been reported as resulting from the release of thromboxane A2.  We studied the cardiopulmonary response to endotoxin in sheep with and without treatment with a thromboxane synthetase inhibitor, OKY-046.  The animals were implanted with instruments for crystallographic dimension analysis of the left ventricle and measurement of left ventricular, aortic, left atrial, and pulmonary arterial pressures and cardiac index.  Thirteen sheep received 1.0 micrograms/kg of Escherichia coli endotoxin with (n = 6) and without (n = 7) OKY-046 (10 mg/kg bolus, then 10 micrograms/kg/min).  OKY-046 prevented the increase in pulmonary arterial pressure and decrease in cardiac index usually seen during the early phase of endotoxemia.  Between 8 and 12 hours after the administration of endotoxin, cardiac index increased from 6.4 +/- 0.8 to 8.4 +/- 0.8 L/min/m2.  Concomitantly, the end-systolic pressure/diameter relationship (a sensitive myocardial contractility index) significantly decreased from 14.7 +/- 0.6 to 7.7 +/- 0.7 mm Hg/mm.  Another index of the left ventricular contractility, the maximum rate of pressure rise was also reduced.  OKY-046 prevented decreases in end-systolic pressure/diameter relationship and maximum rate of pressure rise.
Platelet fatty acids and function in two distinct regions of Belgium: relationship to age and dietary habits.  We compared the dietary habits, fatty acid composition of plasma and platelet phospholipids, and platelet function in two groups of healthy Belgian male subjects, known to differ in their mortality rate from coronary heart disease (CHD).  In the Walloon subjects, there was a larger intake of saturated and a lower intake of (n-6) polyunsaturated fats, confirmed by the fatty acid composition of plasma and platelet phospholipids.  While plasma HDL and total cholesterol were similar in the present samples of the two communities, platelet aggregation to epinephrine was significantly higher in the Walloon subjects.  When the two populations were divided into younger (28-54 years) and older (55-73 years) age groups, the older Walloon subjects exhibited platelet hyper-aggregability to most of the agonists, compared to the other three groups.  In addition to dietary fats, alcohol and smoking habits, age was an important determinant of platelet phospholipid fatty acids and platelet reactivity.  The present results reinforce those of previous studies, indicating that platelet behaviour is significantly affected by the main risk factors for CHD.
Potential complications of high-dose epinephrine therapy in patients resuscitated from cardiac arrest   Adults resuscitated from nontraumatic cardiac arrest who received intravenous epinephrine in doses chosen by the treating physician and who survived at least 6 hours were studied to determine if high-dose epinephrine produced more complications than standard-dose.  A total of 68 patients were enrolled and evaluated for postresuscitation complications attributable to epinephrine, using a two-tailed t test, and contingency analysis.  The 33 patients receiving high-dose epinephrine and 35 patients receiving standard-dose epinephrine were similar in demographics and variables known to affect outcome.  There was no difference in potential complications between groups except serum calcium, which was 1.97 mmol/L (SD, 0.20) in the high-dose epinephrine group and 2.10 (SD, 0.20) in the standard-dose group.  Hospital discharge rates (18% in the high-dose vs 30% in the standard-dose group) and neurological status on discharge were not significantly different.  High-dose epinephrine did not produce increased direct complications in this cardiac arrest population compared with standard-dose epinephrine.
Cardiomyopathy associated with the smoking of crystal methamphetamine.  The smoking of crystal methamphetamine, or "ice," is a growing drug abuse problem in the United States.  The toxic effects of methamphetamine smoking have not been well described.  We describe two patients with cardiovascular toxic effects associated with the smoking of crystal methamphetamine.  In our first patient, the use of smokeable methamphetamine was associated with the subsequent development of pulmonary edema and a dilated cardiomyopathy.  In our second patient, the smoking of crystal methamphetamine likely produced diffuse vasospasm that resulted in acute myocardial infarction, cardiogenic shock, and death.  The recognition of potentially lethal cardiac complications associated with the smoking of crystal methamphetamine is of extreme significance and should be emphasized to potential abusers of this drug.
Caloric expenditure, life status, and disease in former male athletes and non-athletes.  This study examined the association between aerobic, caloric exercise expenditure and life status (living vs deceased) as well as the prevalence rates of hypertension (HBP) and cardiovascular disease (CVD) in former male athletes (ATH) and non-athletes (N-ATH).  The initial survey for this study was done in 1952.  Follow-up surveys of respondents were done in 1960, 1968, 1976, and 1984.  The present study used all subjects who responded fully to activity and health questions in 1976 and who were reported as either dead or alive (not lost to follow-up) in 1984.  A total of 348 subjects (185 ATH, 163 N-ATH) were assessed and caloric expenditure groups were established by kilocalories (kcal) of aerobic exercise per week; 0 kcal (group 1), 1-399 kcal (group 2), 400-899 kcal (group 3), 900-1499 kcal (group 4), 1500-2499 kcal (group 5), and 2500+ kcal (group 6).  Only activity considered to be aerobic was used in the establishment of the aerobic categories.  Death rate was highest in groups 1 and 2.  Subjects in group 1 tended to be the oldest.  Year of birth (age) (P less than 0.001) and CVD (P less than 0.05) as reported in 1976 were significantly related to mortality between 1976 and 1984.  College athletic status and 1976 exercise level were not significantly related to mortality.  Prevalence of CVD and HBP was highest in groups 1 and 6, suggesting a moderate amount of aerobic activity as optimal.
Selective inhibition by a synthetic hirudin peptide of fibrin-dependent thrombosis in baboons.  To determine the importance of the thrombin substrate recognition exosite for fibrinogen binding in the formation of both arterial and venous thrombi, we evaluated the antithrombotic effects of the tyrosine-sulfated dodecapeptide from residues 53-64 of hirudin (H peptide) in a nonhuman primate model.  This peptide was studied because it inhibits thrombin cleavages of fibrinogen by simple competition without blocking enzyme catalytic-site function.  When an exteriorized arteriovenous access shunt model was used in baboons (Papio anubis), thrombus formation was induced by placing a thrombogenic device made of (i) a segment of tubing coated covalently with type I collagen, which generated platelet-rich thrombi under arterial flow conditions, and (ii) two subsequent annular regions of flow expansion that produced fibrin-rich thrombi typically associated with venous valves and veins.  Thrombus formation was quantified by measurements of 111In-labeled platelet and 125I-labeled fibrinogen deposition in both arterial-flow and venous-flow portions of the device.  Continuous infusion of H peptide (0.5, 15, and 75 mg/kg) proximal to the device for 40 min interrupted, in a dose-response fashion, formation of fibrin-rich thrombus in the regions of disturbed flow and generation of fibrinopeptide A.  In contrast, H peptide did not inhibit the capacity of platelets to deposit on the collagen surface (P greater than 0.2 at all doses) or to form hemostatic plugs (as assessed by measurements of bleeding time; P greater than 0.1 at all doses).  These findings suggest that, by competitive inhibition of fibrinogen binding to thrombin, fibrin-rich venous-type thrombus formation may be selectively prevented.  This strategy may be therapeutically attractive for preserving normal platelet function when conventional anticoagulant therapy is contraindicated.
Home blood pressure readings in borderline hypertensive patients.  Home blood pressure monitoring can provide valuable information for physicians managing borderline hypertensive patients.  This study was conducted to compare office and home blood pressures in 36 borderline hypertensive subjects, and to determine the accuracy of the home monitoring unit used.  The patients were very willing to record their home blood pressures for an extended period of time.  The home blood pressure monitors were found to be quite accurate, and blood pressures measured at home were significantly lower than readings obtained in the office.  In 39% (14 of 36) of the subjects studied, the average home blood pressures were more than 10 mmHg lower than their office readings.  These findings support the hypothesis that home blood pressure monitoring can be useful in the management of borderline hypertensive patients.
Vasodilatory beta-blockers: systemic and regional hemodynamic effects.  The systemic and regional hemodynamic alterations in hypertension and of the beta-adrenergic receptor inhibiting agents are reviewed.  Hemodynamically, hypertension may be regarded as persistent elevation of arterial pressure associated with increased total peripheral resistance.  In early or mild essential hypertension, however, increased total peripheral resistance may not readily be recognized because of the overriding effect of increased cardiac output.  Clearly, the hemodynamics of blood pressure control are complex, and the mechanisms of antihypertensive agents must be used appropriately.  The early beta-blockers reduced heart rate and cardiac output immediately after intravenous administration without immediately reducing arterial pressure, and calculated total peripheral resistance was increased.  With prolonged oral treatment, arterial pressure decreased while maintaining a reduced heart rate and cardiac output.  Total peripheral resistance, however, remained elevated.  Recent beta-blockers, such as celiprolol, provide an improved physiologic response by instantly reducing arterial pressure and total peripheral resistance without reducing heart rate or cardiac output or expanding intravascular volume.
Angina, ischemia, and effort tolerance with vasodilating beta-blockers.  beta-Blockers are known to suppress exercise-induced ischemia but give rise to such problems as fatigue or dyspnea on effort and also bradycardia.  In a series of double-blind, placebo-controlled studies of celiprolol (a cardioselective beta 1-blocker with beta 2-agonist and vasodilatory properties) in patients with hypertension and angina and in normal volunteers, it was found that celiprolol did not produce bradycardia when given in combination with verapamil.  Celiprolol did reduce exercise-induced ischemia, but there was no reduction in cardiac output at rest or on exercise compared with placebo.  Compared with atenolol, celiprolol produced less dyspnea and fatigue at submaximal levels of exercise.  It is concluded that celiprolol possesses certain differences, compared with conventional beta-blockers, that may be of direct clinical benefit.
Cardiovascular risk factors and the effects of intervention.  Cardiovascular risk factors can be substantially modified by changes in life-style such as diet, exercise, smoking cessation, and moderation of alcohol consumption.  In turn, these can reduce blood pressure, heart rate at rest, and blood lipid concentrations.  Epidemiologic evidence shows that for every 1% change in serum cholesterol levels, there is a 3% change in the likelihood of developing coronary heart disease.  In addition, a long-term (5-year) change of 5 to 6 mm Hg in diastolic blood pressure can reduce the chances of stroke by 35 to 40% and of coronary heart disease by 20 to 25%.  The full impact of this broad range of interventions on population health has still to be fully realized in many countries, including the United Kingdom, however it is likely to be considerable.  Some of the recent evidence in support of such cardiovascular risk factor modification is selectively reviewed.
Dialysis-induced alterations in left ventricular filling: mechanisms and clinical significance.  Quantitative two-dimensional (2-D) and Doppler echocardiography were used to determine whether hemodialysis results in alterations in left ventricular (LV) diastolic filling that might contribute to dialysis-induced hypotension, as well as to assess whether any hemodynamic variables or indices of diastolic filling might be used to identify which patients were at the greatest risk of becoming hemodynamically unstable during dialysis.  Sixteen male patients undergoing routine maintenance hemodialysis for end-stage renal disease were prospectively studied before and after hemodialysis.  Following hemodialysis there was a significant prolongation (P less than 0.05) in LV isovolumetric relaxation time (IVRT), as well as a significant reduction in the rate and extent of early rapid ventricular filling (P less than 0.005); in contrast, late atrial-assisted filling did not change significantly.  A multiple stepwise linear regression analysis of predialysis hemodynamic parameters and noninvasive indices of LV filling showed that there was a significant independent inverse relationship between the frequency of dialysis-related hypotensive episodes and the duration of early LV filling (r = -0.81; P less than 0.001).  These results suggest that hemodialysis results in discrete alterations in early LV filling, with no significant compensatory increase in late atrial-assisted ventricular filling.  Further, patients with the shortest early LV filling times appeared to have the greatest predilection for becoming hemodynamically unstable during dialysis.
Use of the fistula assessment monitor to detect stenoses in access fistulae.  Twenty-three unselected hemodialysis patients with functioning access arteriovenous fistulae were studied prospectively to determine the best technique for detecting stenoses within the fistulae.  Combined clinical assessment and fistula assessment monitoring were compared with transbrachial angiography.  Fistula assessment monitoring was more accurate (96%) than combined clinical assessment (accuracy, 52%) in stenosis detection.  Complications of angiography occurred in 17% of patients; there were no complications of fistula assessment monitoring.  Fistula assessment monitoring was better than combined clinical assessment in predicting clinical outcome for arteriovenous fistulae over 6 months and was as good as angiography.  Routine fistula assessment monitoring could reduce inappropriate angiography and detect clinically significant silent stenoses.  It is an ideal method for monitoring arteriovenous access fistulae.
Cyclosporine-induced thrombotic microangiopathy resulting in renal allograft loss and its successful reuse: a report of two cases.  Cyclosporine-induced thrombotic microangiopathy is a rare complication of renal transplantation.  It commonly leads to graft loss.  The mechanism of this entity is unknown.  Factors intrinsic to the donor kidney appear to play an important role.  We describe two cases of renal transplant patients who lost their first grafts secondary to cyclosporine-induced thrombotic microangiopathy.  These patients were successfully retransplanted with an immunosuppressive protocol that included long-term cyclosporine.  We conclude that graft loss from this entity is not a contraindication to subsequent successful transplantation with cyclosporine.
Unsuspected mitral stenosis.  PURPOSE AND PATIENTS AND METHODS: We observed a series of patients in whom the diagnosis of mitral stenosis was first discovered in the echocardiography laboratory.  Because of this experience, we examined the records of 152 patients with echocardiographic evidence of rheumatic mitral stenosis to determine the clinical characteristics and course of patients with unsuspected mitral stenosis as well as those factors that may have obscured the diagnosis.  RESULTS: Of these 152 patients, 18 had mitral stenosis that was unsuspected clinically until the echocardiogram.  These patients were elderly, with a median age of 72 years.  They were all referred for echocardiography because of cardiac symptoms.  Eight patients were referred for evaluation of congestive heart failure.  Five patients were referred for evaluation of aortic valve disease.  Three patients were referred because of cerebrovascular accidents and atrial fibrillation.  The Doppler-determined mean diastolic mitral gradient ranged from 4 to 15 mm Hg (mean: 7 mm Hg).  Mitral stenosis ranged in severity from trivial to very severe.  Eight patients had moderate to severe mitral stenosis with estimated mitral valve areas less than or equal to 1.5 cm2.  Seven had mild or trivial mitral stenosis with estimated mitral valve areas greater than 1.5 cm2.  After further evaluation, two patients underwent mitral valve surgery with improvement of congestive failure.  In three patients, warfarin therapy was begun to prevent emboli.  Thus, five of 18 patients had a significant immediate change in therapy because of the discovery of mitral stenosis.  CONCLUSION: The diagnosis of mitral stenosis may not be suspected in the presence of advanced age, other serious cardiac and medical conditions, or mechanical factors that complicate the physical examination.  In these patients, mitral stenosis may be hemodynamically significant and may cause significant symptoms.
Prognostic significance of valvular regurgitation in patients with infective endocarditis.  PURPOSE: Doppler ultrasound is a sensitive modality for detecting and quantitating valvular regurgitation in patients with infective endocarditis.  Because valvular regurgitation leads to heart failure, we evaluated the prognostic significance of Doppler-detected valvular regurgitation in patients with endocarditis who had not yet developed clinical heart failure.  PATIENTS AND METHODS: We reviewed the medical records of 65 patients with a clinical diagnosis of infective endocarditis from May 1985 to March 1990.  A total of 49 patients were included in the study: 33 patients with native valve endocarditis and 16 patients with prosthetic valve endocarditis.  The initial Doppler echocardiogram was examined in these patients to determine the presence and degree of valvular regurgitation.  RESULTS: Significant (moderate to severe) valvular regurgitation was detected in 23 (47%) patients.  The presence or absence of significant valvular regurgitation did not predict the development of congestive heart failure, the need for surgery, or death (p = NS).  The development of congestive heart failure was significantly associated with the need for surgery (p less than 0.0001) and death (p less than 0.05).  CONCLUSION: We conclude that the detection of significant valvular regurgitation in patients with infective endocarditis who have not yet developed heart failure is not predictive of future complications nor does the absence of significant valvular regurgitation identify a group of patients with a more favorable prognosis.  In our series, patients who developed congestive heart failure had a significantly higher incidence of surgery and death.  Therefore, decisions regarding clinical management in patients with infective endocarditis should not be made solely on the presence or absence of echocardiographically detected valvular regurgitation.
Comparison of labetalol versus enalapril as monotherapy in elderly patients with hypertension: results of 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring.  PURPOSE: This study compared the safety and efficacy of labetalol and enalapril as antihypertensive therapy for elderly patients.  PATIENTS AND METHODS: A randomized, open-label, parallel controlled trial was conducted.  After completing a 4-week placebo phase, 79 elderly (65 years or older) patients with an average standing diastolic blood pressure (BP) 95 mm Hg or above and 114 mm Hg or less were randomized to receive a 12-week course of either labetalol or enalapril in an open-label design.  The patients' BP and heart rate were evaluated biweekly by trained observers unaware of the treatment status, and drug dosage was titrated (up to 400 mg twice a day of labetalol or 40 mg daily of enalapril) to achieve a standing diastolic BP of less than 90 mm Hg and a decrease of 10 mm Hg from baseline.  Patients underwent 24-hour ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM) at the end of the placebo phase and again after 8 weeks of active treatment.  RESULTS: The treatment groups were comparable in their reduction of supine diastolic BP, with no significant differences between the two treatments.  Labetalol demonstrated a significantly greater reduction (p less than 0.05) in standing diastolic BP at the end of the titration period compared to enalapril, but this difference was not significant by the end of the study period.  Based on 24-hour ABPM readings, labetalol reduced mean 24-hour diastolic BP (p less than 0.05) and mean heart rate (p less than 0.05) more than enalapril.  The labetalol-treated patients were significantly less often above their diastolic BP goal throughout the 24-hour ABPM period (p less than 0.01).  The two treatments were equally well tolerated.  CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that labetalol and enalapril are equally effective in lowering supine diastolic BP in the elderly, but labetalol is more effective in lowering ambulatory BP and heart rate throughout the day.
Elderly patients with congestive heart failure under prepaid care.  PURPOSE: Because of concern about the quality of care received by Medicare patients in health maintenance organizations (HMOs), the care of patients with congestive heart failure (CHF) in eight HMOs was compared with the care of fee-for-service (FFS) Medicare cases.  PATIENTS AND METHODS: We compared the care of 170 patients with CHF enrolled in one of eight Medicare HMOs with the care of 191 similar FFS patients.  Panels of expert physicians developed criteria for evaluating quality of care, and specially trained nurse clinicians abstracted medical records.  RESULTS: Outpatient evaluation and management were similar in both settings, although HMO patients were significantly more likely to be advised to restrict salt intake.  However, FFS patients with uncontrolled hypertension were more likely to have their medication regimens changed (62% versus 36%, p less than 0.01).  Ejection fractions were obtained equally as often, and inpatient management was similar for both groups.  Nonetheless, HMO providers scheduled follow-up visits within 1 week of hospital discharge more often (42% versus 27%, p less than 0.01).  CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that financial incentives of prepaid care are not detrimental to most aspects of care for CHF patients.  More rapid follow-up after hospital discharge for patients with CHF suggests that HMOs may be more effective in delivering continuity of care for patients with chronic illness.
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.  Emery-Dreifuss syndrome is a rare form of muscular dystrophy associated with cardiac complications that lead to sudden death.  The disorder and its potential anaesthetic implications in the management of a patient who presented for orthopaedic surgery is described.
Drug-induced supraventricular tachycardia: a case report of fluoxetine.  We report the occurrence of supraventricular tachycardia and hypotension in a 54-year-old woman after maintenance therapy with fluoxetine.  Although cases of tachycardia and palpitations have been reported, supraventricular tachycardia and hypotension have not been directly attributed to fluoxetine.
Torsades de pointes therapy with phenytoin.  We present the case of a woman with myocardial infarction complicated by malignant ventricular arrhythmia and torsades de pointes.  The torsades de pointes was refractory to conventional therapy but responsive to phenytoin.  This case suggests the clinical usefulness of phenytoin for adjunct therapy of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias when standard treatment modalities fail.
Plasma concentrations of epinephrine during CPR in the dog.  STUDY OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether the marked increase in the plasma concentrations of epinephrine during cardiopulmonary arrest and basic life support (BLS) could be due in part to decreased distribution and/or elimination.  DESIGN AND INTERVENTIONS: Dogs were randomly assigned to undergo adrenalectomy or sham-operation.  Some adrenalectomized animals received an epinephrine infusion.  MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: In the seven sham-operated dogs, the plasma epinephrine concentrations increased markedly during BLS as expected.  In the seven adrenalectomized dogs receiving a constant infusion of epinephrine, cardiopulmonary arrest and BLS induced a three to sixfold increase in plasma epinephrine concentrations, with an increase in the mean plasma epinephrine concentrations (calculated from the area under the curve) of 1.21 +/- 0.12 ng/mL (P less than .05).  In the seven adrenalectomized dogs receiving a constant epinephrine infusion but not subjected to cardiopulmonary arrest, the plasma epinephrine concentrations remained stable.  Finally, in the seven adrenalectomized dogs not receiving an epinephrine infusion, the mean plasma epinephrine concentrations during BLS (calculated from the area under the curve) increased only by 0.05 +/- 0.04 ng/mL, significantly less than in adrenalectomized dogs receiving an epinephrine infusion (P less than .01).  CONCLUSION: The increase in plasma epinephrine concentrations during cardiopulmonary arrest and BLS is due in part to an altered disposition of epinephrine.
Demographic, social and stress correlates of hypertension among the urban poor.  The relationship of demographic, social, and psychological variables to the diagnosis of hypertension in a population of urban, poor, predominantly black out-patients is reported.  Subjects were 182 patients presenting for health care at Wayne State University Family Practice Clinic.  Age, race, marital status, attendance at religious services, education, employment status, income, source of income and interpersonal stress were significantly related to a diagnosis of hypertension in this sample.  Of those characteristics found to be significantly related to hypertension, discriminative analysis showed that age, race, education and frequency of church attendance were most important in predicting a diagnosis of hypertension among this out-patient sample of the urban poor.  Implications for clinical care and for future research needs are considered.
Strain differences in baroreflex inhibition by centrally infused enalapril in old rats.  To determine whether inhibition of the brain renin-angiotensin system would affect baroreflexes similarly in old rats of different strains, we compared 24-month-old male Fischer 344 and Sprague-Dawley rats.  Baroreflex sensitivity was tested while the rats were awake by recording reflex heart rate responses elicited as blood pressure was elevated with phenylephrine or lowered with sodium nitroprusside.  Sprague-Dawley rats had higher blood pressures and lower heart rates initially.  Chronic infusion of enalapril, a converting enzyme inhibitor, into a lateral cerebral ventricle (ICV) for two weeks lowered blood pressure in Sprague-Dawley but not in Fischer 344 rats.  Furthermore, reflex bradycardia was unaffected in either rat strain, but reflex tachycardia was selectively suppressed in Fischer 344 rats.  Thus, although time controls were not done to rule out spontaneous changes during the 14-day infusion period, these results suggest that central cardiovascular regulation does not change similarly with age in these two rat strains.  As removal of the brain renin-angiotensin system lowered blood pressure in one strain and inhibited reflex tachycardia in the other, the divergence could mean that the brain renin-angiotensin system acts differently to keep blood pressure elevated in Sprague-Dawley rats and modulate reflex tachycardia in Fischer 344 rats.
Prostacyclin production in myocardial infarction in the acute phase and during follow-up.  Twenty-five patients with myocardial infarction were monitored in the acute phase and during follow-up with regard to the in vivo production of prostacyclin (PGI2) and thromboxane (TxA2), by measurement of their major urinary metabolites, 2,3-dinor-6-keto-PGF1 alpha and 2,3-dinor-TxB2, respectively.  In 22 of these patients PGI2 and TxA2 production were also assessed before, during and after an exercise test performed 6 weeks after discharge.  In approximately 24% of patients the in vivo production of prostacyclin did not increase during the acute phase of the infarction process.  This inability was usually associated with a decrease in the release of heart muscle enzymes, and was mostly frequently observed in women.  During the exercise tolerance test, none of the patients showed any increase in prostacyclin production, in contrast to healthy volunteers, in whom a significant increase was seen.  There were no differences between patients with and without an increase in prostacyclin production during the acute phase.  At the follow-up 2 years after the myocardial infarction, eight cardiac events had occurred, all of which were noted among patients who exhibited an expected increase in prostacyclin production in association with the infarction.  This would seem reasonable, since most of the patients in this group had larger primary infarctions.
Rapid and correct diagnosis of myocardial infarction: standardized case history and clinical examination provide important information for correct referral to monitored beds.  The value of thorough examination of the case history as a diagnostic tool on hospitalization of patients with suspected myocardial infarction was investigated in three independent prospective studies.  Use of a limited number of pain-related elements (= 'criteria'), that had already been obtained in the emergency room, could improve the decision on whether or not to admit patients to the coronary-care unit.  As an example, in one of the studies, use of such criteria would have reduced the number of 'unnecessary' coronary-care-unit admissions from 298 to 162, a 46% reduction (P less than 0.001).  In the same patient sample, use of the criteria could have reduced the number of patients with definite acute myocardial infarction, admitted to the general wards, from 47 to 22, a 53% reduction (P less than 0.01).  These favourable results were confirmed in the two independent, smaller-scale studies.
Serological arguments for classifying Raynaud's phenomenon as idiopathic.  Twenty-five patients with idiopathic Raynaud's phenomenon were followed prospectively for a mean period of 48 months.  Clinical and laboratory assessments were performed on admission and on followup.  The sera were analyzed for the presence of autoantibodies (antinuclear, antiskeleton and antiorganelle antibodies).  Sixteen patients were antinuclear antibody positive and 2 anticentromere antibody positive.  Eight patients produced antivimentin, 5 antimitochondrial, 4 anti-Golgi complex, and 3 anticentriol antibodies.  Eleven patients produced antidesmosome antibodies.  Only one patient (anti-RNP and antidesmosome antibody positive) developed a systemic disease (mixed connective tissue disease) during followup.  The initial screening of sera may help to classify Raynaud's phenomenon as idiopathic more accurately.
Angiographic morphology in unstable angina and its relation to transient myocardial ischemia and hospital outcome.  Complex stenosis morphology frequently occurs in patients with unstable angina pectoris.  However, its relation to transient myocardial ischemia and hospital outcome has not been ascertained.  To address this issue, 88 patients with significant (greater than or equal to 50%) coronary artery disease presenting with angina--new onset (n = 38), worsening (n = 20) or at rest (n = 30)-were studied.  Patients with left main artery disease, normal coronary arteries or occlusion of the ischemia-related arteries were not included in the study.  Continuous electrocardiographic recordings were obtained during the first 24 hours.  Angiography was performed within 1 week from admission.  Complex morphology was defined as any stenosis with irregular borders, overhanging edges or intracoronary thrombus.  Only data referring to the in-hospital outcome were considered in this study.  Adverse end points were sudden death, myocardial infarction and emergency revascularization.  Analysis of the angiograms revealed a complex morphology in 58 patients (group 1).  The remaining 30 patients served as control subjects (group 2).  Thirty-two of the 58 group 1 patients had an unfavorable clinical outcome (positive predictive value, 55%).  A similar outcome occurred in only 2 of the 30 group 2 patients (negative predictive value, 93%).  Of the 32 group 1 patients who had an unfavorable clinical outcome, 29 had a cumulative duration of transient myocardial ischemia of greater than or equal to 60 minutes per 24 hours.  A similar duration of ischemia, however, was observed in another 6 group 1 and in 8 group 2 patients.
Anginal symptoms without ischemic electrocardiographic changes during ambulatory monitoring in men with coronary artery disease.  Episodes of angina pectoris without electrocardiographic (ECG) signs of myocardial ischemia during 24-hour ambulatory monitoring were studied in 128 patients with a history of stable angina, angiographically proven coronary artery disease and positive exercise test results.  In all, 341 episodes of ischemic ECG changes (ST-segment depression greater than 1 mm for greater than 1 minute) and 190 episodes of angina pectoris were observed: 86 episodes consisted of both ECG changes and angina pectoris, 255 episodes consisted only of ECG changes, and 104 episodes only of angina pectoris.  Duration and magnitude of ST-segment deviation and heart rate at the onset of ischemia were similar in the 86 symptomatic and the 255 asymptomatic episodes with ECG changes.  The 104 episodes of angina pectoris without ECG changes were detected in 44 patients (34%) (group A); 29 of them had only episodes with angina pectoris and 15 patients had both--episodes of angina pectoris with and without ECG changes.  In 84 patients (66%) (group B) angina pectoris without ECG changes was not observed; all episodes were accompanied by ischemic ECG changes in these patients.  No differences in the angiographic extent of coronary artery disease and in exercise test data were seen in both groups A and B; however, maximal ST-segment depression during exercise testing was significantly greater in group B than in group A patients (2.4 +/- 0.8 mm vs 1.9 +/- 0.9 mm; p less than 0.05).
Dependence of Doppler echocardiographic transmitral early peak velocity on left ventricular systolic function in coronary artery disease.  The influence of systolic function on pulsed Doppler echocardiographic transmitral flow velocity patterns was assessed before and after postextrasystolic (PES) potentiation in 12 normal subjects (control group) and in 25 patients with previous healed myocardial infarction (MI) group.  Simultaneous high-fidelity left ventricular pressure measurements were performed in all patients.  A programmed single-coupled right ventricular extrasystole was induced during echocardiographic and subsequent cineangiocardiographic recordings.  Adequate angiograms for volumetric analysis in both baseline and PES beats were obtained in 23 patients (7 in the control group and 16 in the MI group).  PES potentiation of contraction was more pronounced in the MI group than in the control group.  PES changes in ejection fraction, stroke volume and end-systolic volume were significantly greater in the MI group than in the control group (11 vs 5%, p less than 0.005; 15 vs 5 ml/m2, p less than 0.005; and -13 vs -4 ml/m2, p less than 0.01, respectively).  In contrast, PES potentiation prolonged the time constants of left ventricular pressure decline derived from exponential curve fits with a zero (Tw) and non-zero (Tb) asymptote pressure in the MI group to the same extent as in the control group (4 vs 5 ms, difference not significant [NS], and 9 vs 11 ms, NS, respectively).  In the PES beat, peak E velocity remained unaltered (48 vs 49 cm/s, NS) in the control group, whereas it increased significantly (p less than 0.0001) from 47 to 51 cm/s in the MI group.
Relation of serum lipoprotein cholesterol levels to presence and severity of angiographic coronary artery disease.  To assess the relation of lipid levels to angiographic coronary artery disease (CAD), lipid profiles were obtained on 125 men and 72 women undergoing diagnostic coronary angiography.  CAD, defined as greater than or equal to 25% diameter narrowing in a major coronary artery, was present in 106 men (85%) and 54 women (75%).  Multiple regression analyses revealed that only high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol level in men, and age and total/HDL cholesterol ratio in women, were independently associated with the presence of CAD after adjustment for other risk factors.  HDL cholesterol level and age were significantly correlated with both extent (number of diseased vessels) and severity (percent maximum stenosis) of CAD in men.  In women, age was the only independent variable related to severity, whereas age and total/HDL cholesterol ratio were related to extent.  Of 71 patients with total cholesterol less than 200 mg/dl, 79% had CAD.  With multiple regression analyses, HDL cholesterol was the only variable independently related to the presence and severity of CAD in these patients after adjustment for age and gender; extent was significantly associated with age and male gender, and was unrelated to any of the lipid parameters.  With use of multiple logistic and linear regression analyses of the group of 197 patients, HDL cholesterol was the most powerful independent variable associated with the presence and severity of CAD after adjustment for age and gender.  HDL cholesterol was also an independent predictor of extent.  Age was independently associated with each of the end points examined, and was the variable most significantly related to extent.  These data add to the growing body of information demonstrating an important association between HDL and CAD.
Edge detection versus densitometry for assessing coronary stenting quantitatively.  The optimal method used to analyze quantitatively the immediate angiographic results of coronary stenting in the coronary arteries has not been studied.  Accordingly, minimal luminal cross-sectional area was determined by 2 methods, edge detection and densitometry, in 19 patients who underwent percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) and then coronary stent implantation for symptomatic coronary stenoses.  The correlation coefficient, 0.73 before angioplasty, decreased to 0.59 after coronary angioplasty and then increased to 0.83 after stent implantation.  The mean differences between edge detection and densitometric determinations of minimal luminal cross-sectional area were 0.31 +/- 0.51 mm2 before PTCA, -0.38 +/- 1.22 mm2 after angioplasty and 0.35 +/- 0.79 mm2 after coronary stenting.  It is concluded that, although the correlation and variability in the measurement of minimal luminal cross-sectional area between edge detection and densitometry deteriorate after PTCA, they are improved after stenting, probably because of smoothing of the vessel contours by the stent and remodeling of the stented segment into a more circular configuration.  Therefore, in the stented coronary artery, edge detection and densitometry are equally acceptable methods of analysis.
Frequency of success and complications of coronary angioplasty of a stenosis at the ostium of a branch vessel.  The authors of this study hypothesized that percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty of a stenosis at the ostium of a branch vessel, whether isolated or associated with a bifurcation stenosis, was associated with reduced procedural success and increased in-hospital complications.  One hundred six patients with 119 ostial branch stenoses were compared with 1,168 patients who underwent angioplasty of nonostial branch stenoses.  An ostial branch stenosis was defined as a stenosis in the proximal 3 mm of a major branch vessel (diagonal [n = 58], posterior descending [n = 21], obtuse marginal [n = 34] and intermediate [n = 6]).  The ostial branch stenosis was isolated in 61% of the patients and associated with a bifurcation stenosis in 39%.  Despite a balloon to artery ratio of 1.05:1, angiographic success was 74% of ostial branch stenoses versus 91% of nonostial stenoses (p less than 0.01).  Furthermore, angioplasty of ostial branch stenoses resulted in a complication rate of 13 versus 5% for angioplasty of nonostial branch stenoses (p less than 0.01).  Therefore, angioplasty of ostial branch stenoses results in decreased procedural success and significant residual stenosis despite adequate balloon sizing, suggesting arterial elastic recoil and a significant increase in complications.
Doppler echocardiographic comparison of the Carpentier and Duran anuloplasty rings versus no ring after mitral valve repair for mitral regurgitation.  To compare the hemodynamic results of different anuloplasty techniques of primary valve repair for mitral regurgitation, 122 patients were prospectively studied with Doppler echocardiograms 5 to 10 days after operation.  Seventy-seven patients had mitral valve prolapse, 27 had coronary artery disease, 13 patients had rheumatic mitral valve lesions and 5 patients had infective endocarditis.  Forty-eight patients received the flexible Duran ring, 46 received the more rigid Carpentier ring and 28 patients received no ring.  Doppler echocardiography demonstrated a significant decrease in mitral valve area estimated by the pressure half-time method in patients who received either a Carpentier (2.6 +/- 0.8 cm2) or Duran ring (2.8 +/- 0.8 cm2) when compared with patients who received no ring (3.2 +/- 0.7 cm2) (p = 0.01).  No significant differences were observed for peak transmitral diastolic velocity, peak transmitral diastolic gradient, or the grade of mitral regurgitation by color flow Doppler mapping between patients with and without rings.  The etiology of mitral disease and concomitant surgical procedures accompanying mitral valve repair did not significantly influence mitral valve area, peak velocity or peak gradient.  These data suggest that Carpentier and Duran rings decrease the hemodynamic mitral valve area; however, the decrease in valve area is small and not associated with a clinically important increase in transvalvular gradient.
Thermolabile methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase: an inherited risk factor for coronary artery disease.  Severe methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) deficiency with less than 2% of normal enzyme activity is characterized by neurological abnormalities, atherosclerotic changes, and thromboembolism.  We have discovered a "new" variant of MTHFR deficiency which is characterized by the absence of neurological abnormalities, an enzyme activity of about 50% of the normal value, and distinctive thermolability under specific conditions of heat inactivation.  In this study, lymphocyte MTHFR specific activities in the thermolabile variant and control groups were 5.58 +/- 0.91 and 10.33 +/- 2.89 nmol formaldehyde formed/mg protein/h, respectively.  The difference was significant (P less than .01).  However, there was overlap among the individual values from the two groups.  On the other hand, residual MTHFR activity after heat inactivation was 11.2 +/- 1.43% in the thermolabile variant and 36.3 +/- 5.18% in the controls.  There was no overlap.  Enzyme studies in 10 subjects with thermolabile MTHFR and their family members support the hypothesis that thermolabile MTHFR is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.  To elucidate the association of thermolabile MTHFR with the development of coronary artery disease, we determined the thermostability of lymphocyte MTHFR in 212 patients with proven coronary artery disease and in 202 controls without clinical evidence of atherosclerotic vascular disease.  Thermolabile MTHFR was found in 36 (17.0%) cardiac patients and 10 (5.0%) controls.  The difference in incidence between the two groups was statistically significant (P less than .01).  The average age at onset of clinical coronary artery disease in 36 patients with thermolabile MTHFR was 57.3 +/- 7.6 years (35-72 years).  The mean total plasma homocysteine concentration in patients with thermolabile MTHFR was 13.19 +/- 5.32 nmol/ml and was significantly different from the normal mean of 8.50 +/- 2.80 nmol/ml (P less than .05).  There was no association between thermolabile MTHFR and other major risk factors.  We conclude that thermolabile MTHFR is a variant(s) of MTHFR deficiency which is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.  In addition, it is positively associated with the development of coronary artery disease.  Determination of in vitro thermostability of lymphocyte MTHFR is a reliable method for identifying subjects with this abnormality.
The spectrum of portal vein thrombosis in liver transplantation.  Thrombosis of the portal vein with or without patency of its tributaries used to be a contraindication to orthotopic liver transplantation (OLTX) until quite recently.  Rapid progress in the surgical technique of OLTX in the last few years has demonstrated that most patients with portal vein thrombosis can be safely and successfully transplanted.  Presented here is a series of 34 patients with portal vein thrombosis transplanted at the University of Pittsburgh since 1984.  The various techniques used to treat various forms of thrombosis are described.  The survival rate for this series was 67.6% (23 of 34 patients).  Survival was best for patients who underwent phlebothrombectomy or placement of a jump graft from the superior mesenteric vein.  The survival rate also correlated with the amount of blood required for transfusion during surgery.  Overall it is concluded that a vast majority of the patients with thrombosis of the portal system can be technically transplanted and that their survival rate is comparable to that of patients with patent portal vein.
Fibrous skeleton and ventricular outflow tracts in double-outlet right ventricle.  Twenty-four hearts in which both great arteries arose from the right ventricle were studied to establish variations present within the fibrous skeleton and infundibular morphologies.  Variations were also noted in the location of the ventricular septal defect and measurements were obtained of the outlet septum and the circumferences of the arterial valves.  Completely muscular subarterial infundibulums were present in only 9 (37.5%) of the hearts, with varying degrees of fibrous continuity between the leaflets of the arterial and atrioventricular valves in the remainder.  The aorta was rightward and posterior in 12 (50%) of the hearts, and subaortic and subpulmonary ventricular septal defects were present in equal numbers in this group.  No subaortic defects were present when the aorta was side-by-side and right-sided.  No subpulmonary defects were present in hearts with a posterior aorta.  The mean ratio of 0.91 +/- 0.36 for the subpulmonary to subaortic length of the outlet septum was significantly less than the value of 1.54 +/- 0.41 noted previously in hearts with tetralogy of Fallot (p less than 0.001).
Superiority of retrograde cardioplegia after acute coronary occlusion.  Because antegrade cardioplegia may limit the distribution of cardioplegia beyond a coronary occlusion, this study was undertaken to determine whether retrograde coronary sinus cardioplegia provides superior myocardial protection during revascularization of an acute coronary occlusion.  In 20 adult pigs, the second and third diagonal branches were occluded with a snare for 1 1/2 hours.  Animals were then placed on cardiopulmonary bypass and underwent 30 minutes of ischemic arrest with multidose, potassium, crystalloid cardioplegia.  In 10 animals, the cardioplegia was given antegrade through the aortic root, whereas in 10 others, it was given retrograde through the coronary sinus.  After the arrest period, the coronary snares were released and all hearts were reperfused for 3 hours.  Postischemic damage in the myocardium beyond the occlusions was assessed by wall motion scores using two-dimensional echocardiography (4 = normal to -1 = dyskinesia), the change in myocardial pH from preischemia, and the area of necrosis/area of risk (histochemical staining).  Hearts protected with retrograde coronary sinus cardioplegia had less tissue acidosis (change in pH = 0.08 +/- 0.03 versus 0.41 +/- 0.13; p less than 0.05), higher wall motion scores (2.0 +/- 0.6 versus 1.3 +/- 0.3; not significant), and less myocardial necrosis (43.4% +/- 3.6% versus 73.3% +/- 3.5%; p less than 0.0001).  We conclude that retrograde coronary sinus cardioplegia provides more optimal myocardial protection than is possible with antegrade cardioplegia after revascularization of an acute coronary occlusion.
Efficacy of coronary sinus cardioplegia in patients with complete coronary artery occlusions.  Myocardial areas distal to complete coronary artery occlusions are poorly protected by antegrade cardioplegia.  We assessed the effects of coronary sinus cardioplegia in 30 patients undergoing bypass operations and at high risk of cardioplegic maldistribution because of the following anatomical patterns of coronary artery disease: critical (greater than or equal to 50%) stenosis of the left main trunk with total occlusion of the right coronary artery (16 patients) or critical (greater than or equal to 70%) stenosis of the right coronary artery with total occlusion of the left anterior descending (11 patients) or circumflex artery (3 patients).  After induction of arrest through the aorta, coronary sinus cardioplegia was given intermittently during the cross-clamp period at a flow rate of 100 mL/min.  Intraoperatively, occluded arteries were consistently found to be filled with the retrogradely infused solution.  One patient died early postoperatively of low cardiac output and a second patient died later during his hospital stay, presumably of an arrhythmia.  At autopsy, none of them had pathological evidence of inadequate myocardial protection.  One patient sustained a myocardial infarction and 3 others required inotropes for more than 24 hours postoperatively.  Postoperative values for right and left stroke volume indices were not significantly different from prebypass levels.  Overall, these results are consistent with the occurrence of limited intraoperative ischemic damage and, by inference, suggest the efficacy of the coronary sinus route in preserving myocardial areas supplied by completely occluded coronary arteries and, hence, in jeopardy of inadequate cardioplegia delivery.
Repair of posterior left ventricular aneurysm in a six-year-old boy.  Left ventricular aneurysms and diverticula are rarely encountered in the pediatric age group.  This paper reports a case of congestive heart failure and mitral regurgitation in a 6-year-old boy with a large posterolateral left ventricular aneurysm.  Complete repair was successfully performed by excision of the aneurysm and Dacron patch reconstruction of the left ventricular free wall.  The patch extended onto the posterior annulus of the mitral valve, thus restoring the mitral valve to normal geometry and correcting the mitral insufficiency.  The surgical literature on congenital cardiac diverticula and acquired aneurysms in children is reviewed and summarized.
Silicone pouch for protection of automatic implantable cardioverter-defibrillator leads.  Automatic implantable cardioverter-defibrillator has become routine treatment for recurrent, drug-resistant ventricular tachycardia.  Although there is documentation regarding clinical experience and device performance, there is little information on how to avoid complications related to the retrieval of sensing and defibrillation leads from the subcutaneous space.  We are reporting our experience with a silicone pouch for protection of automatic implantable cardioverter-defibrillator leads that allows immediate and simple retrieval of the leads in case an automatic implantable cardioverter-defibrillator generator is needed.
Dural spinal cord arteriovenous malformation.  After multiple hospital admissions and an inpatient rehabilitation stay, a 68-year-old woman was transferred to our rehabilitation facility with a paraparesis of unknown etiology.  Previous studies included four CT scans and three MRIs which did not demonstrate the lesion.  A myelogram was noncharacteristic.  The correct diagnosis, confirmed by selective angiography, was ultimately contingent upon recognition of the clinical features and natural history of dural spinal cord arteriovenous malformations (SCAVM).  The unusual combination of this multitude of nondiagnostic imaging studies in the uncommon dural SCAVM served to delay diagnosis and treatment.  Such delay may have great functional consequences.  This report illustrates the importance of suspecting SCAVM and recognizing its features.  Emphasis is placed on the physiatrist's role in assuring proper diagnosis to expedite a timely treatment and to obtain the best functional outcome.  A brief review of the classification, clinical features, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and prognosis of SCAVM is presented.
Detecting hypertension: screening versus case finding in Norway.  OBJECTIVE--Evaluation of detection of hypertension in adults in the county of Nord-Trondelag, Norway.  DESIGN--Cross sectional survey with clinical follow up examinations.  SETTING--Health survey by screening teams from the national health screening service, and examinations by all 106 general practitioners in the county.  SUBJECTS--During 1984-6, 74,977 persons (88.1% of those aged 20 years and over) participated in the health survey.  MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES--Hypertension (when assessed by standardised recording and by questionnaires on drug treatment for hypertension) according to the blood pressure thresholds used in the Norwegian treatment programme.  Subjects positive on screening were grouped after clinical examination into treatment groups.  RESULTS--In all, 2399 subjects were positive for hypertension.  Before screening 6210 (8.3%) patients reported taking antihypertensive drugs and another 3849 (5.1%) had their blood pressure monitored regularly.  All who screened positive were referred to their general practitioner and evaluated according to a standard programme.  As a result, drug treatment was started in 406 (0.5%) participants screened and blood pressure monitoring in another 1007 (1.3%).  Of all patients taking antihypertensive drugs after the screening, 6399 (94.0%) had been diagnosed before screening, and of those whose blood pressure was monitored after the screening, 79.3% had been diagnosed before screening.  CONCLUSIONS--At the blood pressure screening thresholds used, and when hypertension is defined by an overall clinical diagnosis, the results indicate that general practitioners can find and diagnose hypertensive patients with the case finding strategy.
Treatment with deferoxamine during ischemia improves functional and metabolic recovery and reduces reperfusion-induced oxygen radical generation in rabbit hearts   BACKGROUND.  Iron may play a central role in oxygen radical generation during myocardial ischemia and after reperfusion.  Because conditions during ischemia may also liberate iron, we hypothesized that administration of the iron chelator deferoxamine during ischemia would result in improved functional and metabolic recovery after postischemic reperfusion.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  Isolated, perfused rabbit hearts were studied by phosphorus-31 nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.  The hearts received one of three treatments: deferoxamine at the onset of 30 minutes of global ischemia (n = 9), deferoxamine as a bolus followed by a continuous 15-minute infusion begun at reflow (n = 9), or standard perfusate (n = 7).  Hearts treated with deferoxamine during ischemia showed better recovery of developed pressure than did control hearts (63.2 +/- 7.5% versus 41.2 +/- 2.9% of baseline) (p = 0.02) and better recovery of myocardial phosphocreatine content (92.4 +/- 10.3% versus 68.2 +/- 4.5% of baseline, p less than 0.05).  These functional and metabolic benefits were comparable to those obtained with deferoxamine treatment during early reperfusion.  In 15 additional hearts, intraischemic treatment with deferoxamine resulted in no reduction in oxygen radical concentrations as measured on frozen tissue by electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy at end ischemia, but the treatment eliminated the reperfusion-induced increase of free radical generation observed in control hearts (2.9 +/- 0.01 versus 7.0 +/- 0.07 microM, p less than 0.001).  The magnitude of reduction was similar to that when deferoxamine was given at the onset of reflow (2.4 +/- 0.02 microM, p less than 0.001 versus control).  CONCLUSIONS.  These results demonstrate improved functional and metabolic recovery of myocardium treated with deferoxamine during ischemia, accompanied by a reduction in reperfusion-induced oxygen free-radical generation to the same degree as reflow treatment, confirming the importance of iron in the pathogenesis of myocardial reperfusion injury.
Myocardial infarct size-limiting effect of ischemic preconditioning was not attenuated by oxygen free-radical scavengers in the rabbit.  BACKGROUND.  The limiting effect of ischemic preconditioning on infarct size has been reported in canine hearts, which contain considerable amounts of xanthine oxidase, a free radical-producing enzyme.  Furthermore, a recent study suggested that free radicals generated during preconditioning may contribute to the cardioprotective effect of preconditioning.  The present study examined 1) whether preconditioning limits infarct size in rabbits, which, like humans, lack myocardial xanthine oxidase and 2) whether the cardioprotective effect of PC is mediated by free radicals.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  A branch of the circumflex coronary artery in rabbits was occluded for 30 minutes and then reperfused for 72 hours.  Myocardial infarct size and area at risk were determined by histology and fluorescent particles, respectively.  Five groups were studied: an untreated control group, a preconditioned group (PC group), a high-dose superoxide dismutase (SOD)-treated preconditioned group (high-dose SOD-PC group), a low-dose SOD-treated preconditioned group (low-dose SOD-PC group), and a SOD-plus-catalase-treated preconditioned group (SOD/CAT-PC group).  Preconditioning was performed with four episodes of 5 minutes of ischemia and 5 minutes of reperfusion.  The free radical scavengers (30,000 units/kg SOD for high-dose SOD-PC group, 15,000 units/kg SOD for low-dose SOD-PC group, and 30,000 units/kg SOD plus 55,000 units/kg catalase for SOD/CAT-PC group) were infused intravenously over 60 minutes starting 20 minutes before preconditioning.  Infarct size as the percentage of area at risk was 45.1 +/- 3.5% (mean +/- SEM) in the control group (n = 11), 13.3 +/- 3.0% in the PC group (n = 12), 9.7 +/- 1.8% in the high-dose SOD-PC group (n = 8), 11.9 +/- 2.2% in the low-dose SOD-PC group (n = 6), and 9.6 +/- 2.3% in the SOD/CAT-PC group (n = 6) (p less than 0.05 versus control for the last four values).  The differences in infarct size as the percent of area at risk among the PC, high-dose SOD-PC, low-dose SOD-PC, and SOD/CAT-PC groups were not significant.  CONCLUSION.  Ischemic preconditioning delays ischemic myocardial necrosis regardless of myocardial xanthine oxidase content.  Free radicals are unlikely to have a major role in the mechanism of the preconditioning in rabbits.
Transvascular intracardiac applications of a miniaturized phased-array ultrasonic endoscope. Initial experience with intracardiac imaging in piglets.  BACKGROUND.  Recent advances in miniaturization of phased-array and mechanical ultrasound devices have resulted in exploration of alternative approaches to cardiac and vascular imaging in the form of transesophageal or intravascular imaging.  Preliminary efforts in adapting phased-array endoscopes designed for transesophageal use to a transvascular approach have used full-sized phased-array devices introduced directly into the right atrium in open-chested animals.  The purpose of this study was to assess the feasibility of using a custom-made, very small phased-array endoscope for intracardiac imaging introduced intravascularly through a jugular venous approach in young piglets.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  Experimental atrial septal defects created in four piglets (3-4 weeks old) had been closed with a buttoned atrial septal defect closure device consisting of an occluder in the left atrium and a counteroccluder in the right atrium.  Five to 15 days after atrial septal defect closure, the piglets were returned to the experimental laboratory, where a 6.3-mm, 17-element, 5-MHz phased-array probe mounted on a 4-mm endoscope was introduced through a cutdown incision of the external jugular vein and advanced to the right atrium.  From the right atrium all four cardiac chambers, their inflows and outflows, and all four valves were well imaged with minimal superior and inferior rotation.  High-resolution imaging of the atrial septum defined with anatomical accuracy, later verified by autopsy, the exact placement of both the occluder and counteroccluder in the left and right sides of the atrial septal defects and the absence of any shunting across the atrial septum in any of the four animals.  CONCLUSIONS.  Our efforts indicate that transvascular passage of small phased-array probes can be easily accomplished and is a promising technique for detailed visualization of cardiac structures.  This approach may provide an alternative to transesophageal echocardiography, particularly for guiding interventional procedures such as placement of transcatheter closure devices in pediatric patients.
Contractility and stiffness of noninfarcted myocardium after coronary ligation in rats. Effects of chronic angiotensin converting enzyme inhibition.  BACKGROUND.  Previous studies have shown that global left ventricular function is depressed after myocardial infarction.  However, little is known about the effects of myocardial infarction on contractility and the passive-elastic properties of residual myocardium.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  We evaluated isometric function and passive myocardial stiffness in isolated, noninfarcted left ventricular papillary muscle from rats 6 weeks after sham operation or myocardial infarction.  Maximal developed tension and peak rate of tension rise (+dT/dt) were significantly decreased in untreated rats with large myocardial infarction compared with controls (3.3 +/- 1.1 versus 4.3 +/- 0.6 g/mm2 and 49.5 +/- 17.5 versus 72.5 +/- 10.5 g/mm2/sec, respectively).  Time to peak tension was prolonged (120 +/- 8 versus 102 +/- 4 msec) and myocardial stiffness was increased in untreated myocardial infarction rats compared with controls (35.2 +/- 4.9 versus 24.2 +/- 3.7).  Rats with smaller myocardial infarctions differed from controls only with respect to a prolongation of time to peak tension.  Papillary muscle myocyte cross-sectional area was increased by 44% (p less than 0.05), and myocardial hydroxyproline content was increased by 160% (p less than 0.05) in rats with large myocardial infarctions compared with controls.  To determine whether treatment that improves left ventricular function after myocardial infarction also improves myocardial function, rats were treated with captopril beginning 3 weeks after myocardial infarction and continuing for 3 weeks.  Treatment with captopril attenuated the prolongation in time to peak tension in the myocardial infarction rats; however, developed tension, +dT/dt, and muscle stiffness remained abnormal.  Compared with untreated myocardial infarction rats, captopril-treated myocardial infarction rats had a 9% decrease in myocyte cross-sectional area (p = 0.1) but a persistent increase in myocardial collagen content.  In summary, large myocardial infarction in rats causes contractile dysfunction, increased stiffness, myocyte hypertrophy, and increased collagen content in the residual noninfarcted myocardium.  Treatment with captopril alters the process of cardiac remodeling and hypertrophy and improves one parameter of contractility in noninfarcted myocardium; however, myocardial collagen content and myocardial stiffness remain abnormal.  CONCLUSIONS.  These findings suggest that angiotensin converting enzyme inhibition in the rat infarct model of heart failure improves global cardiac performance via combined effects on myocardial function and the peripheral circulation.
Coronary blood flow in dogs with contractile dysfunction due to experimental volume overload.  BACKGROUND.  Abnormalities in coronary blood flow are responsible for stress-induced reductions in contractile function in pressure overload hypertrophy.  Less is known about coronary blood flow in volume overload.  In this study, we tested the hypothesis that coronary blood flow abnormalities were responsible for contractile abnormalities in experimental volume overload hypertrophy.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  We examined coronary blood flow at rest and during pacing in seven dogs with contractile dysfunction secondary to chronic experimental mitral regurgitation (average regurgitant fraction at 3 months, 0.58 +/- 0.05).  After 3 months of mitral regurgitation, left ventricular mass had increased from 92 +/- 8 g at baseline to 118 +/- 10 g (p less than 0.002).  The slope of the end-ejection stress-volume relation, one of our indexes used to estimate contractile function, had fallen from 5.4 +/- 0.3 at baseline to 3.0 +/- 0.3 at 3 months of mitral regurgitation (p less than 0.001).  In the mitral regurgitation dogs, coronary blood flow at rest was similar to that of control dogs (endocardial blood flow: control dogs, 1.33 +/- 0.12 ml/min/g; mitral regurgitation dogs, 1.16 ml/min/g, p = NS; epicardial blood flow at rest: control dogs, 1.30 +/- 0.16 ml/min/g; mitral regurgitation dogs 1.13 +/- 0.2 ml/min/g, p = NS).  With pacing-induced stress, coronary blood flow increased appropriately in control and mitral regurgitation dogs.  Ultrasonic dimension gauges placed in the endocardium and epicardium demonstrated no further deterioration in ventricular function during pacing in the mitral regurgitation dogs.  In a separate group of five control dogs and five dogs with mitral regurgitation and left ventricular dysfunction, coronary blood flow was examined in the conscious closed-chest state at rest, during adenosine infusion, and during rapid atrial pacing (240 beats/min).  Blood flow increased similarly in both groups during pacing and adenosine infusion.  CONCLUSIONS.  We conclude that in dogs with mitral regurgitation that have developed contractile dysfunction, abnormalities in coronary blood flow do not explain the resting contractile dysfunction.  Furthermore, studies during pacing-induced stress and coronary vasodilation with adenosine demonstrate that substantial coronary blood flow reserve is present in this type of volume overload hypertrophy.
Myocardial perfusion-contraction matching. Implications for coronary heart disease and hibernation.  Experimental studies demonstrate that short-term regional perfusion-contraction matching, in which the energy demands of regional myocardial contraction are reduced to match the diminished myocardial substrate supply, occurs during states of low coronary blood flow under resting conditions and during exercise-induced ischemia.  This phenomenon is rapidly reversible and appears to occur in several clinical settings.  Sustained perfusion-contraction matching is observed in states of partial experimental ischemia of intermediate duration lasting several hours.  This condition might be called short-term hibernation and resembles clinical conditions such as unstable angina pectoris or myocardial infarction with some residual perfusion in which the contractile defect can be improved by reperfusion provided the ischemia is not severe enough to cause transmural necrosis.  Such experimental and clinical observations may or may not relate to the setting of regional dysfunction at rest in patients with chronic coronary heart disease, in whom manifestations of acute ischemia may be absent but improvement of wall motion abnormalities occurs after CABG or balloon angioplasty.  This condition may constitute the hypothetical state of chronic myocardial hibernation, for which tentative evidence exists from metabolic and perfusion studies using PET.  Whether such a condition of prolonged perfusion-contraction matching might be associated with adaptive processes that could allow its persistence for long periods without manifest ischemia remains to be investigated.
Ten-year incidence of myocardial infarction and prognosis after infarction. Department of Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study of Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery   BACKGROUND.  The 10-year incidence of myocardial infarction (fatal and nonfatal) and the prognosis after infarction were evaluated in 686 patients with stable angina who were randomly assigned to medical or surgical treatment in the Veterans Administration Cooperative Study of Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  Myocardial infarction was defined by either new Q wave findings or clinical symptoms compatible with myocardial infarction accompanied by serum enzyme elevations with or without electrocardiographic findings.  Treatment comparisons were made according to original treatment assignment; 35% of the medical cohort had bypass surgery during the 10-year follow-up period.  The overall cumulative infarction rate was somewhat higher in patients assigned to surgery (36%) than in medical patients (31%) (p = 0.13) due to perioperative infarctions (13%) and an accelerated infarction rate after the fifth year of follow-up (average, 2.4%/yr in the surgical group versus 1.4%/yr in the medical group).  The 10-year cumulative incidence of death or myocardial infarction was also higher in surgical (54%) than in medical (49%) patients (p = 0.20).  According to the Cox model, the estimated risk of death after infarction was 59% lower in surgical than in medical patients (p less than 0.0001).  The reduction in postinfarction mortality with surgery was most striking in the first month after the event: 99% in the first month (p less than 0.0001) and 49% subsequently (p less than 0.0001).  The estimated risk of death in the absence of infarction was nearly identical regardless of treatment (p = 0.75).  Exclusion of perioperative infarctions did not alter the findings.  CONCLUSIONS.  Although surgery does not reduce the incidence of myocardial infarction overall, it does reduce the risk of mortality after infarction, particularly in the first 30 days after the event (fatal infarctions).
Value of peak exercise oxygen consumption for optimal timing of cardiac transplantation in ambulatory patients with heart failure.  BACKGROUND.  Optimal timing of cardiac transplantation in ambulatory patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction is often difficult.  To determine whether measurement of peak oxygen consumption (VO2) during maximal exercise testing can be used to identify patients in whom transplantation can be safely deferred, we prospectively performed exercise testing on all ambulatory patients referred for transplant between October 1986 and December 1989.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  Patients were assigned into one of three groups on the basis of exercise data: Group 1 (n = 35) comprised patients accepted for transplant (VO2 less than or equal to 14 ml/kg/min); group 2 (n = 52) comprised patients considered too well for transplant (VO2 greater than 14 ml/kg/min); and group 3 (n = 27) comprised patients with low VO2 rejected for transplant due to noncardiac problems.  All three groups were comparable in New York Heart Association functional class, ejection fraction, and cardiac index (p = NS).  Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure was significantly lower in group 2 than in either group 1 or 3 (p less than 0.05), although there was wide overlap.  Patients with preserved exercise capacity (group 2) had cumulative 1- and 2-year survival rates of 94% and 84%, which are equal to survival levels after transplantation.  In contrast, patients rejected for transplant (group 3) had survival rates of only 47% at 1 year and 32% at 2 years, whereas patients awaiting transplantation (group 1) had a survival rate of 70% at 1 year (both p less than 0.005 versus patients with VO2 greater than 14 ml/kg/min).  All deaths in group 2 were sudden.  By univariate and multivariate analyses, peak VO2 was the best predictor of survival, with only pulmonary capillary wedge pressure providing additional prognostic information.  CONCLUSIONS.  These data suggest that cardiac transplantation can be safely deferred in ambulatory patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction and peak exercise VO2 of more than 14 ml/min/kg.
Catheter modification of the atrioventricular junction with radiofrequency energy for control of atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia.  BACKGROUND.  The utility of transcatheter application of radiofrequency energy to eliminate atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT) was investigated.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  Thirty-nine patients (mean age, 53 +/- 20 years; range 14-86 years) with medically refractory AVNRT underwent perinodal ablation with radiofrequency energy.  A custom-designed 6F catheter with a large (3-mm-long) distal electrode and interelectrode pacing of 2 mm was used in the majority of cases.  The catheter used for ablation was initially positioned across the tricuspid anulus to obtain the largest His bundle electrogram, then withdrawn to obtain the largest atrial:ventricular electrogram ratio, with a small His bundle electrogram (less than or equal to 100 microV).  Each application of radiofrequency energy (350-550 kHz, 16.2 +/- 5.2 W) was stopped after 60 seconds or if PR prolongation or an impedance rise was noted.  The endpoints of the procedure were persistent modification of atrioventricular nodal conduction (either first-degree atrioventricular block or impairment of ventriculoatrial conduction) and noninducibility of AVNRT before and during isoproterenol administration.  Radiofrequency energy was applied a mean of 6.8 +/- 3.5 times per session.  After a mean follow-up of 8 +/- 3.0 months, 32 of the 39 patients (82%) have been free of AVNRT, and did not have high grade AV block.  Three patients (8%) developed complete atrioventricular block and had pacemakers implanted.  Two patients had unsuccessful initial procedures, and two patients had initially successful ablations but had recurrences of tachycardia 4-6 weeks later.  Elimination of AVNRT appeared to be due to effects on the retrograde fast pathway in most patients.  CONCLUSIONS.  Radiofrequency ablation of the perinodal right atrium appears to be safe and effective for treatment of typical AVNRT.
Fibrinogen, viscosity, and white blood cell count are major risk factors for ischemic heart disease. The Caerphilly and Speedwell collaborative heart disease studies   BACKGROUND.  Recent studies have suggested that hemostatic factors and white blood cell count are predictive of ischemic heart disease (IHD).  The relations of fibrinogen, viscosity, and white blood cell count to the incidence of IHD in the Caerphilly and Speedwell prospective studies are described.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  The two studies have a common core protocol and are based on a combined cohort of 4,860 middle-aged men from the general population.  The first follow-up was at a nearly constant interval of 5.1 years in Caerphilly and 3.2 years in Speedwell; 251 major IHD events had occurred.  Age-adjusted relative odds of IHD for men in the top 20% of the distribution compared with the bottom 20% were 4.1 (95% confidence interval, 2.6-6.5) for fibrinogen, 4.5 (95% confidence interval, 2.8-7.4) for viscosity, and 3.2 (95% confidence interval, 2.0-4.9) for white blood cell count.  Associations with IHD were similar in men who had never smoked, exsmokers, and current smokers, and the results suggest that at least part of the effect of smoking on IHD is mediated through fibrinogen, viscosity, and white blood cell count.  Multivariate analysis shows that white blood cell count is an independent risk factor for IHD as is either fibrinogen or viscosity, or possibly both.  Jointly, these three variables significantly improve the fit of a logistic regression model containing all the main conventional risk factors.  Further, a model including age, smoking habits, fibrinogen, viscosity, and white blood cell count predicts IHD as well as one in which the three hemostatic/rheological variables are replaced by total cholesterol, diastolic pressure, and body mass index.  CONCLUSION.  Jointly, fibrinogen, viscosity, and white blood cell count are important risk factors for IHD.
Upward shift of the lower range of coronary flow autoregulation in hypertensive patients with hypertrophy of the left ventricle   BACKGROUND.  At any given perfusion pressure, coronary reserve is expressed by the difference between autoregulated and maximally vasodilated flow.  In hypertension the raised coronary resistance reduces the steepness of the pressure-flow relationship at maximal vasodilatation.  In the presence of cardiac hypertrophy the line of autoregulated flow becomes higher.  For these reasons coronary reserve is reduced and the point at which baseline flow approaches the maximal achievable flow might be shifted to a higher perfusion pressure.  Thus, any reduction below this elevated and critical value of pressure would lower the coronary flow.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  The investigated patients were normotensive (controls, nine) and hypertensive with normal (group I, seven) or augmented LV mass index because of concentric LV hypertrophy (group II, eight).  All had effort-induced angina and angiographically normal left epicardial branches.  Flow in the great cardiac vein was measured by thermodilution in the baseline and during stepwise (5 mm Hg every 5 minutes) decrease of the coronary perfusion pressure with a titrated nitroprusside i.v.  infusion; perfusion pressures of 60 mm Hg in the controls and 70 mm Hg in the hypertensives were taken as end points.  Baseline flow averaged 102 ml/min in normotensives, 104 ml/min in hypertensive group I and 148 ml/min in hypertensive group II.  At the end points flow was similar to baseline in the controls and group I.  In group II coronary flow started to decline and myocardial O2 extraction started to slightly but significantly rise at perfusion pressures of 90-80 mm Hg; at the end point flow was reduced by 26% (p less than 0.01 from baseline).  The perfusion patterns did not seem to be related to the changes in tension-time index and heart rate.  CONCLUSIONS.  The association of high blood pressure (reduced ability of the coronary arterioles to dilate) and hypertrophy of the myocardium (augmented baseline coronary flow) may shift the point of exhaustion of coronary reserve to a higher perfusion pressure and make the myocardium vulnerable to treatment-induced relative hypertension.
Concept of maximal flow ratio for immediate evaluation of percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty result by videodensitometry.  BACKGROUND.  In the setting of percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA), immediate information about the result of the intervention is important, whereas morphological parameters are often less reliable than in diagnostic coronary arteriography.  Recently, a new videodensitometric method was introduced and validated in animal experiments, which allows accurate comparison of maximal myocardial perfusion between situations with different degrees of stenosis.  This method uses mean transit time (Tmn) of the contrast agent at maximal hyperemia as a parameter for maximal flow and is strictly in accordance with indicated dilation theory.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  In 40 patients with angina pectoris, single-vessel disease, and a positive exercise test at the time of acceptance for PTCA, this approach was applied for evaluation of the improvement of maximal flow achieved by the PTCA.  Maximal vasodilation was induced immediately before and 15 minutes after PTCA by intracoronary administration of papaverine, and digital angiographic studies were performed.  By special breath-holding instruction, almost motionless, triggered image acquisition was possible during 15-20 heartbeats.  Excellent subtraction images could be obtained, and reliable determination of Tmn at maximal hyperemia was possible in 33 patients both before and after PTCA.  The ratio between maximal flow after and before PTCA, called maximal flow ratio (MFR), was represented by the ratio between Tmn before and after the intervention and compared with the results of exercise testing 24-48 hours before and 7-10 days after the procedure.  After correction for pressure changes, MFR was 2.2 +/- 1.5 for the 33 dilated vessels and 1.0 +/- 0.2 for 25 normal vessels serving as a control.  In 94% of all patients, an MFR value of more than 1.6 or less than 1.6 discriminated between presence or absence of reversal of exercise test result from positive to negative.  If on-line judgment of success was based upon angiographic parameters or measurement of trans-stenotic pressure gradient, the relation with noninvasive functional improvement was present only in 66% and 74% of all patients, respectively.  A definite range of what can be called normal Tmn at maximal hyperemia could be distinguished, and post-PTCA values for successfully dilated arteries returned completely to this normal range.  CONCLUSIONS.  Accurate comparison of maximal myocardial perfusion before and after PTCA is possible in man, improvement of maximal flow is highly related to functional improvement as indicated by exercise test results, and, therefore, this method provides a straightforward way for on-line evaluation of the result of the intervention.
Heart rate adjustment of exercise-induced ST segment depression. Improved risk stratification in the Framingham Offspring Study   BACKGROUND.  Simple heart rate adjustment of ST segment depression during exercise (delta ST/HR index) and the pattern of ST depression as a function of heart rate during exercise and recovery (the rate-recovery loop) have been shown to improve the ability of the exercise electrocardiogram to detect the presence of coronary heart disease (CHD), but the performance of these methods for the prediction of future coronary events remains to be examined.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  We compared the delta ST/HR index and the rate-recovery loop with standard electrocardiographic criteria for prediction of CHD events in 3,168 asymptomatic men and women in the Framingham Offspring Study who underwent treadmill exercise electrocardiography and who, at entry, were free of clinical and electrocardiographic evidence of CHD.  After a mean follow-up of 4.3 years, there were 65 new CHD events: four sudden deaths, 24 new myocardial infarctions, and 37 incident cases of angina pectoris.  When a Cox proportional hazards model with adjustment for age and sex was used, a positive exercise electrocardiogram by standard criteria (greater than or equal to 0.1 mV horizontal or downsloping ST segment depression) was not predictive of new CHD events (chi 2 = 0.40, p = 0.52).  In contrast, stratification according to the presence or absence of a positive delta ST/HR index (greater than or equal to 1.6 microV/beat/min) and a positive (counterclockwise) rate-recovery loop was associated with CHD event risk (chi 2 = 9.45, p less than 0.01) and separated subjects into three groups with varying risks of coronary events: high risk, when both tests were positive (relative risk 3.6; 95% confidence interval, 2.4-5.4); intermediate risk, when either the delta ST/HR index or the rate-recovery loop was positive (relative risk, 1.9; 95% confidence interval, 1.3-2.8); and low risk, when both tests were negative.  After multivariate adjustment for age, sex, smoking, total cholesterol level, fasting glucose level, diastolic blood pressure, and electrocardiographic evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy, the combined delta ST/HR index and rate-recovery loop criteria remained predictive of coronary events (chi 2 = 5.45, p = 0.02).  CONCLUSIONS.  Heart rate adjustment of ST segment depression by the delta ST/HR index and the rate-recovery loop during exercise electrocardiography can improve prediction of future coronary events in asymptomatic men and women.
Electrocardiographic body surface potential mapping in the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. Noninvasive determination of the ventricular insertion sites of accessory atrioventricular connections.  BACKGROUND.  A reliable, noninvasive procedure to determine the location of accessory atrioventricular connections in patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome would add an important diagnostic tool to the clinical armamentarium.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  Body surface potential mapping (BSPM) using 180 electrodes in various-sized vests and displayed as a calibrated color map was used to determine the ventricular insertion site of the accessory atrioventricular (AV) connections in 34 patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.  Attempts were made to determine the 17 ventricular insertion sites described by Guiraudon et al.  All 34 patients had an electrophysiologic study (EPS) at cardiac catheterization, and 18 had surgery so the ventricular insertion sites could be accurately located using EPS at surgery.  A number of physiologic observations were also made with BSPM.  CONCLUSIONS.  The following conclusions were drawn: 1) BSPM using QRS analysis accurately predicts the ventricular insertion site of accessory AV connections in the presence of a delta wave in the electrocardiogram; 2) the ventricular insertion sites of accessory AV connections determined by BSPM and by EPS at surgery were identical or within one mapping site (1.5 cm or less) in all but four of 18 cases; three of the four exceptions had more than one accessory AV connection, and the other had a very broad ventricular insertion; 3) BSPM and EPS locations of the accessory AV connections correlated very well in the 34 cases despite the fact that BSPM determines the ventricular insertion site and EPS determines the atrial insertion site of the accessory AV connection; 4) as suggested by the three cases of multiple accessory AV connections, EPS and BSPM may be complementary since BSPM identified one pathway and EPS identified the other (in the case with a broad ventricular insertion, BSPM and EPS demonstrated different proportions of that insertion); 5) BSPM using ST-T analysis is very much less accurate in predicting the ventricular insertion site of accessory AV connections unless there is marked preexcitation; 6) standard electrocardiography using the Gallagher grid methodology (but with no attempt at stimulating maximal preexcitation) was not as accurate as QRS analysis of BSPM in predicting the ventricular insertion site of the accessory AV connection; however, exact comparison is hampered by the different number and size of the Gallagher and Guiraudon insertion sites; 7) BSPM using QRS analysis appears to be very accurate in predicting right ventricular versus left ventricular posteroseptal accessory AV connections; 8) typical epicardial right ventricular breakthrough, indicative of conduction via the specialized AV conduction system, occurs in all patients with left ventricular free wall accessory AV connections; 9) epicardial right ventricular breakthrough was not observed in cases with right ventricular free wall or anteroseptal accessory AV connections; 10) epicardial right ventricular breakthrough can occur in the presence of posteroseptal accessory AV connections, whether right or left ventricular; and 11) the delay in epicardial right ventricular breakthrough in cases with left ventricular insertion may provide a marker to estimate the degree of ventricular preexcitation.
Diagnostic efficiency of troponin T measurements in acute myocardial infarction   BACKGROUND.  The present study was designed to evaluate the efficiency of a newly developed troponin T enzyme immunoassay for the detection of acute myocardial infarction.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  The study comprised 388 patients admitted with chest pain and suspected myocardial infarction and 101 patients with skeletal muscle damage and additional suspected myocardial cell damage.  Troponin T was elevated to more than twice the analytical sensitivity of the assay (0.5 microgram/l) in all patients with non-Q wave (range, 1.2-5 micrograms/l) and Q wave infarction (range, 3-220 micrograms/l).  Troponin T appeared in serum as early as 3 hours after onset of pain in 50% of the patients and remained elevated in all patients for more than 130 hours, revealing release kinetics of both free cytosolic and structurally bound molecules.  The diagnostic efficiency of troponin T was superior to that of creatine kinase-MB (98% versus 97%) and remained at 98% until 5.5 days after admission, if patients with unstable angina were excluded from analysis.  In the 79 patients with unstable angina, troponin T was elevated (range, 0.55-3.1 micrograms/l) in at least one blood sample from each of 37 patients (56%).  Circulating troponin T was correlated to the presence of reversible ST segment or T wave changes on the electrocardiogram (p less than 0.005) and to the frequency of in-hospital complications.  In the 101 patients with skeletal muscle damage and suspected additional cardiac muscle damage, troponin T was the most useful test; its efficiency was 89% or 94% (depending on the discriminator value used) as compared with 63% for creatine kinase-MB.  CONCLUSIONS.  Thus, the data of the study indicate that the newly developed troponin T test improves the efficiency of serodiagnostic tools for the detection of myocardial cell necrosis as compared with conventionally used cardiac enzymes.
Intravascular ultrasound imaging of human coronary arteries in vivo. Analysis of tissue characterizations with comparison to in vitro histological specimens.  BACKGROUND.  Intravascular ultrasound imaging was performed in 27 patients after coronary balloon angioplasty to quantify the lumen and atheroma cross-sectional areas.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  A 20-MHz ultrasound catheter was inserted through a 1.6-mm plastic introducer sheath across the dilated area to obtain real-time images at 30 times/sec.  The ultrasound images distinguished the lumen from atheroma, calcification, and the muscular media.  The presence of dissection between the media and the atheroma was well visualized.  These observations of tissue characterization were compared with an in vitro study of 20 human atherosclerotic artery segments that correlated the ultrasound images to histological preparations.  The results indicate that high-quality intravascular ultrasound images under controlled in vitro conditions can provide accurate microanatomic information about the histological characteristics of atherosclerotic plaques.  Similar quality cross-sectional ultrasound images were also obtained in human coronary arteries in vivo.  Quantitative analysis of the ultrasound images from the clinical studies revealed that the mean cross-sectional lumen area after balloon angioplasty was 5.0 +/- 2.0 mm2.  The mean residual atheroma area at the level of the prior dilatation was 8.7 +/- 3.4 mm2, which corresponded to 63% of the available arterial cross-sectional area.  At the segments of the coronary artery that appeared angiographically normal, the ultrasound images demonstrated the presence of atheroma involving 4.7 +/- 3.2 mm2, which was a mean of 35 +/- 23% of the available area bounded by the media.  CONCLUSIONS.  Intravascular ultrasound appears to be more sensitive than angiography for demonstrating the presence and extent of atherosclerosis and arterial calcification.  Intracoronary imaging after balloon angioplasty reveals that a significant amount of atheroma is still present, which may partly explain why the incidence of restenosis is high after percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty.
Xanthine oxidase inhibition does not limit canine infarct size.  BACKGROUND.  Evidence supporting the role of xanthine oxidase in myocardial reperfusion injury is based on studies with pharmacological interventions used to inhibit enzyme function.  Controversy exists, however, regarding the true role of xanthine oxidase in reperfusion injury.  This study was performed to determine whether xanthine oxidase inhibition limits myocardial injury due to coronary artery occlusion and reperfusion.  METHODS AND RESULTS.  Anesthetized dogs underwent coronary artery occlusion (90 minutes) and reperfusion (6 hours).  Oxypurinol (28 mg/kg) or amflutizole (30 mg/kg), chemically unrelated inhibitors of xanthine oxidase, or vehicle was infused intravenously 15 minutes before and 3 hours after reperfusion.  Regional myocardial blood flow was determined with radiolabeled microspheres.  Infarct size was determined with the tetrazolium method.  Myocardial infarct size (percent of risk region) was less in oxypurinol-treated dogs, 32 +/- 16%, compared with that of the control group, 46 +/- 15%.  Infarct size for the amflutizole-treated dogs, 40 +/- 21%, was not significantly different from that of the control group.  There were no differences in rate-pressure product or collateral blood flow to account for differences in infarct size.  Uric acid concentration in the coronary venous plasma increased after reperfusion in the dogs treated with vehicle but not in the drug-treated dogs.  Xanthine oxidase inhibition was demonstrated in each of the drug treatment groups, but only oxypurinol limited the extent of myocardial injury.  CONCLUSIONS.  Previously reported cardioprotective effects of allopurinol, noted to occur only when the drug was administered chronically, may be related to a property of oxypurinol, a major metabolite of allopurinol.  The beneficial effect of oxypurinol is unrelated to inhibition of superoxide formation during xanthine oxidase-catalyzed oxidation of xanthine and hypoxanthine.
Pulmonary effects of ischemic limb reperfusion: evidence for a role for oxygen-derived radicals.  OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the lung as a reperfusion target after limb ischemia-reperfusion, and to measure specifically the oxygen radical response to this reperfusion.  DESIGN: Paired simple randomized, with continuous interval data in dependent variable and both continuous and nominal independent variables.  SUBJECTS AND INTERVENTION: Sprague-Dawley male rats (n = 195) were anesthetized and both hind limbs occluded for 3.75 hr, the overnight LD50.  Alveolar lavage was performed on the animals 1 hr after reperfusion or on survivors 20 hr after reperfusion.  Groups were either undosed or pretreated with alpha-tocopherol as an antioxidant (50 mg/kg.day) 2 days before ischemia.  MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Luminol-enhanced chemiluminescence was measured in both phorbol myristate acetate-stimulated and unstimulated macrophages.  Nanomoles of superoxide radicals per 10(6) alveolar cells/min were also measured using a cytochrome c reduction assay.  A significant (p less than .01, Student's t-test), time-dependent increase in response of cells from ischemic-reperfused rats was seen.  Pretreatment with antioxidant had no effect at 1 hr, but significant differences were seen in the 20-hr survivors.  CONCLUSIONS: These studies show that alveolar lavage cells, 95% macrophages, reflect the reperfusion of ischemic-reperfused hind limbs by a significant increase in oxygen radical activity, an effect partly suppressed in antioxidant-dosed survivors.
Adrenergic stimulation of renal prostanoids in the Lyon hypertensive rat.  Young, genetically hypertensive Lyon (LH) rats exhibited an increased renal in vivo turnover of norepinephrine and an elevated urinary excretion of thromboxane B2 when compared with normotensive (LN) and low blood pressure (LL) controls.  Therefore, the effects of norepinephrine (1.2 x 10(-8) to 9.6 x 10(-7) M) and of phenylephrine (5 x 10(-8) to 1.9 x 10(-6) M) on renal function and the urinary excretion of prostanoids were assessed in isolated perfused kidneys of 8-week-old LH, LN, and LL rats.  In addition, the effects of norepinephrine were assessed before and during thromboxane A2/prostaglandin H2 receptor blockade by AH23848 (4 x 10(-6) M).  Before drug infusion, LH kidneys differed from those of LN and LL controls by having an elevated renal vascular resistance and a decreased natriuresis and glomerular filtration rate; the urinary output of prostaglandin E2 and F2 alpha, of 6-ketoprostaglandin F1 alpha, and of thromboxane B2 was similar in the three strains.  The constrictor effects of norepinephrine and phenylephrine were significantly increased in LH rat kidneys compared with LL but not with LN controls, and their pressure-natriuresis was markedly reduced.  Norepinephrine and phenylephrine induced a 10- to 20-fold dose-dependent increase in the synthesis of the four prostanoids, which was more pronounced in LH than in LN and LL rats for thromboxane B2 only.  AH23848 infusion significantly reduced the vascular effects of norepinephrine and increased the natriuretic response of LH but not of LN and LL rat kidneys.
Kinetic abnormalities of the red blood cell sodium-proton exchange in hypertensive patients.  The present study was designed to examine the kinetics of Na(+)-H+ exchange in red blood cells of normotensive and hypertensive subjects and its relation to the previously reported abnormalities in Na(+)-Li+ exchange.  The Na(+)-H+ antiporter activation kinetics were studied by varying cell pH and measuring net Na+ influx (mmol/l cell x hr = units) driven by an outward H+ gradient.  The Na(+)-Li+ exchange was determined at pH 7.4 as sodium-stimulated Li+ efflux.  Untreated hypertensive patients (n = 30) had a higher maximal rate of Na(+)-Li+ exchange (0.43 +/- 0.05 versus 0.26 +/- 0.02 units, p less than 0.0003), a higher maximal rate of Na(+)-H+ exchange (62.3 +/- 6.2 versus 47 +/- 4 units; p less than 0.02), but a similar affinity for cell pH compared with normotensive subjects (n = 46).  The cell pH activation of the Na(+)-H+ antiporter exhibited a lower Hill coefficient than that of normotensive subjects (1.61 +/- 0.12 versus 2.56 +/- 0.14; p less than 0.0001).  This index of occupancy of internal H+ regulatory sites was found reduced in most of the hypertensive patients (73%) whether their hypertension was untreated or treated.  Hypertensive patients with Na(+)-Li+ exchange above 0.35 units (0.68 +/- 0.057 units, n = 16) did not exhibit elevated maximal rates of Na(+)-H+ exchange (57.3 +/- 10 units, NS) in comparison with those with Na(+)-Li+ exchange below 0.35 units (66.4 +/- 7.6 units, n = 26), but both groups exhibited reduced Hill coefficients.  Hypertensive patients with enhanced Na(+)-H+ exchange activity (more than 90 units) had normal maximal rates of Na(+)-Li+ exchange.
Specific supersensitivity of the mesenteric vascular bed of Dahl salt-sensitive rats.  Dahl salt-sensitive (DS) and salt-resistant (DR) rats were maintained on a diet containing normal (0.45%) or high (7%) salt for 5 days.  The DS rats had slightly higher systolic blood pressures than DR rats, although a high salt diet failed to significantly elevate pressure in either group when compared with their appropriate (low salt diet) controls.  The sensitivity of the isolated, perfused mesenteric vasculature from DS rats fed a high salt diet to nerve stimulation was greater when compared with all other groups in the presence or absence of cocaine (1 microM).  A similar difference in sensitivity between high salt DS rats and high salt DR rats to bolus injections of norepinephrine was observed only in the presence of cocaine.  The change in sensitivity was characterized by a leftward shift of the dose-response curve without a change in maximum response.  No difference in sensitivity between the high salt DS group and any other treatment group was observed in response to the pressor agents KCl, angiotensin II, 5-hydroxytryptamine or the depressor agent acetylcholine.  These data indicate that DS rats on a short-term, high salt diet possess a significant and specific elevation in sensitivity to nerve stimulation and norepinephrine in the absence of an increase in blood pressure.  Differences in the effectiveness of cocaine among the groups suggest that differences may exist in neuronal uptake (uptake 1).
High NaCl diet enhances arterial baroreceptor reflex in NaCl-sensitive spontaneously hypertensive rats.  Previous studies from our laboratory have shown that arterial baroreceptor reflex control of lumbar sympathetic nerve activity is blunted in the NaCl-sensitive spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR-S) compared with either the NaCl-resistant spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR-R) or the normotensive Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rat.  In the current study, the effect of dietary NaCl supplementation on arterial baroreceptor reflex control of lumbar sympathetic nerve activity and heart rate was assessed in SHR-S and control SHR-R and WKY rats.  Male SHR-S, SHR-R, and WKY rats were fed diets containing either 1% or 8% NaCl beginning at 7 weeks of age and were studied at age 9-10 weeks.  Arterial baroreceptor reflex-mediated changes in lumbar sympathetic nerve activity and heart rate were recorded in conscious, unrestrained rats during phenylephrine-induced (15-40 micrograms/kg/min) and nitroprusside-induced (15-300 micrograms/kg/min) changes in mean arterial pressure.  SHR-S maintained on a 1% NaCl diet had blunted baroreceptor reflex control of lumbar sympathetic nerve activity during acute increases in MAP compared with SHR-R and WKY rats (p less than 0.05).  After ingestion of the 8% NaCl diet, this blunting was absent, indicating enhancement of baroreceptor reflex control of lumbar sympathetic nerve activity.  SHR-S maintained on a 1% NaCl diet also had blunted arterial baroreceptor control of lumbar sympathetic nerve activity during nitroprusside-induced decreases in mean arterial pressure compared with WKY rats, but this was not significantly altered during ingestion of the 8% NaCl diet.
Effect of age on coronary circulation after imposition of pressure-overload in rats.  We examined the effects of pressure overload on coronary circulation in young adult (7 months old) and old rats (18 months old).  Four weeks after the ascending aorta was banded, in vivo left ventricular pressure was measured to estimate the degree of pressure load.  In the two age groups, similar increases in peak left ventricular pressure were observed (113 +/- 7 mm Hg in sham-operated rats versus 160 +/- 11 mm Hg in banded rats of the young adult group; 103 +/- 7 mm Hg in sham-operated rats versus 156 +/- 11 mm Hg in banded rats of the old group).  After isolating the hearts, they were perfused with Tyrode's solution containing bovine red blood cells and albumin.  Resting coronary perfusion pressure-flow relations and reactive hyperemic response after a 40-second ischemia were obtained under beating but nonworking conditions.  In young adult banded rats, significant myocardial hypertrophy was observed at the organ level (124% of controls in left ventricular dry weight/body weight ratio; 119% in left ventricular dry weight/tibial length ratio) and at the cell level.  Minimal coronary vascular resistance obtained by the perfusion pressure-peak flow relation during reactive hyperemia increased to 150% of controls, and coronary flow reserve decreased significantly.  In contrast, myocardial hypertrophy was not observed at the organ or cell level in old banded rats.  However, minimal coronary vascular resistance increased, and flow reserve decreased significantly.  Thus, pressure overload with coronary arterial hypertension caused abnormalities of the coronary circulation in old subjects even in the absence of myocardial hypertrophy.
Systolic Hypertension of the Elderly Program (SHEP). Part 10: Analysis.  The SHEP is a randomized, placebo-controlled trial that will follow standard clinical trial principles in analyzing data relating to its proposed hypotheses.  The protocol has stated a priori the main objective as well as the secondary subgroup hypotheses.  Sample size calculations for SHEP have accounted for dropins to and drop-outs from active therapy as well as for the risk of nonstroke death.  The sample size achieved (4,736 participants) should be adequate to address the proposed questions.  Monitoring procedures have been described and established.  A data and safety monitoring board that uses these procedures is closely following the data from the trial.  The board will periodically examine the data to determine whether termination of the study is warranted.
Arterial mechanical properties in dilated cardiomyopathy. Aging and the response to nitroprusside.  The effects of aging on arterial mechanical properties and the response to nitroprusside were examined in 25 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy.  High-fidelity pressures were recorded with a multisensor catheter.  Pulse wave velocity was determined between two sensors in the thoracic aorta.  Arterial compliance was determined by an analysis of the diastolic waveform and cardiac output.  At baseline, despite a similar systemic vascular resistance, the pulsatile load (e.g., arterial compliance) and wave transmission characteristics (e.g., pulse wave velocity) were altered with aging.  Arterial compliance was reduced in older (greater than 50 yr, n = 8) versus younger (less than 35 yr, n = 8) patients (0.51 +/- 0.17 vs.  1.33 +/- 0.63 ml/mmHg, P less than 0.01) and intermediate in those 35-50 yr of age (n = 9, 0.72 +/- 0.40 ml/mmHg).  There was a positive correlation between age and pulse wave velocity (r = +0.90).  Nitroprusside infusion decreased resistance, increased arterial compliance, and lowered pulse wave velocity in all groups.  Yet, advancing age was associated with a greater fall in wave velocity for a given fall in aortic pressure.  The slope (K) of the relation between pulse wave velocity and aortic diastolic pressure progressively increased with age (0.01 +/- 0.03, 0.06 +/- 0.02, and 0.09 +/- 0.03 m/s-mmHg).  Multiple linear regression analysis revealed a significant relation between K and age.  These data demonstrate that in older patients with dilated cardiomyopathy the left ventricle is coupled to an arterial circulation that has a greater pulsatile load, despite a similar steady load.  Furthermore, these age-related changes in the arterial system affect the hemodynamic response to pharmacologically-induced vasodilatation.
Diastolic dysfunction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Effect on active force generation during systole.  We tested the hypothesis that intracellular Ca++ [( Ca++]i) overload underlies the diastolic dysfunction of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.  Myocardial tissue was obtained at the time of surgery or transplantation from patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and was compared with control myocardium obtained from patients without heart disease.  The isometric contractions and electrophysiologic properties of all myocardial specimens were recorded by standard techniques and [Ca++]i was measured with the bioluminescent calcium indicator aequorin.  In contrast to the controls, action potentials, Ca++ transients, and isometric contraction and relaxation were markedly prolonged in the hypertrophic myocardium, and the Ca++ transients consisted of two distinct components.  At 38 degrees C and 1 Hz pacing frequency, a state of relative Ca++ overload appeared develop, which produced a rise in end-diastolic [Ca++]i, incomplete relaxation, and fusion of twitches with a resultant decrease in active tension development.  We also found that drugs with increase [Ca++]i, such as digitalis, exacerbated these abnormalities, whereas drugs that lower [Ca++]i, such as verapamil, or agents that increase cyclic AMP, such as forskolin, prevented them.  These results may explain why patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy tolerate tachycardia poorly, and may have important implications with regard to the pharmacologic treatment of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Thrombosis-related markers in unstable angina pectoris.  While thrombus formation has been implicated in the pathogenesis of unstable angina, the value of thrombus-related markers for distinguishing unstable from stable angina is not well defined.  Fibrin D-dimer and plasminogen activator inhibitor were prospectively analyzed in the peripheral blood of 46 patients (26 with unstable angina and 20 with stable angina or normal coronary arteries).  Baseline blood samples were drawn within 24 h after rest pain in patients with unstable angina and in 19 of these 26 patients in less than 6 h.  In patients with unstable angina, mean +/- SD (median) values for fibrin D-dimer and plasminogen activator inhibitor values measured 0.09 +/- 0.06 (0.07) microgram/ml and 9.1 +/- 9.6 (5.9) IU, respectively, compared to 0.11 +/- 0.10 (0.05) microgram/ml and 5.5 +/- 1.9 (5.0) IU/ml, in patients in the control group (p = NS for all comparisons between the two groups).  Recurrent in-hospital pain, coronary anatomy and need for intervention showed no relation to the levels of these markers.  In 19 additional patients (9 with unstable angina and 10 control patients) samples from the coronary sinus and the peripheral blood were also analyzed.  Again, in patients with unstable angina all samples were drawn less than 24 h after rest pain; in six of nine patients samples were drawn in less than 6 h.  A coronary sinus to peripheral blood gradient for either of these markers could not be demonstrated.  The differences between peripheral and coronary sinus D-dimer and plasminogen activator inhibitor concentrations were also similar in patients with unstable angina and control patients.
Coronary vasodilation is impaired in both hypertrophied and nonhypertrophied myocardium of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a study with nitrogen-13 ammonia and positron emission tomography.  To assess regional coronary reserve in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, regional myocardial blood flow was measured in 23 patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and 12 control subjects by means of nitrogen-13 ammonia and dynamic positron emission tomography.  In patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy at baseline study, regional myocardial blood flow was 1.14 +/- 0.43 ml/min per g in the hypertrophied (20 +/- 3 mm) interventricular septum and 0.90 +/- 0.35 ml/min per g (p less than 0.05 versus septal flow) in the nonhypertrophied (10 +/- 2 mm) left ventricular free wall.  These were not statistically different from the corresponding values in control subjects (1.04 +/- 0.25 and 0.91 +/- 0.21 ml/min per g, respectively, p = NS).  After pharmacologically induced coronary vasodilation (dipyridamole, 0.56 mg/kg intravenously over 4 min), regional myocardial blood flow in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy increased significantly less than in control subjects both in the septum (1.63 +/- 0.58 versus 2.99 +/- 1.06 ml/min per g, p less than 0.001) and in the free wall (1.47 +/- 0.58 versus 2.44 +/- 0.82 ml/min per g, p less than 0.001).  In addition, patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy who had a history of chest pain had more pronounced impairment of coronary vasodilator reserve than did those without a history of chest pain.  After dipyridamole, coronary resistance in the septum decreased by 38% in patients without a history of chest pain, but decreased by only 14% in those with such a history (p less than 0.05).  Coronary resistance in the free wall decreased by 45% in patients without and by 27% in those with a history of chest pain (p = 0.06).
Mechanisms for left ventricular systolic dysfunction in aortic regurgitation: importance for predicting the functional response to aortic valve replacement   To test the hypothesis that the combined use of the time-varying elastance concept and conventional circumferential stress-shortening relations would elucidate differential mechanisms for left ventricular systolic dysfunction in severe, chronic aortic regurgitation and therefore predict the functional responses to aortic valve replacement, 31 control patients and 37 patients with aortic regurgitation were studied.  The studies included micromanometer left ventricular pressure determinations, biplane contrast cineangiograms under control conditions and radionuclide angiograms under control conditions and during methoxamine or nitroprusside infusions with right atrial pacing.  The patients with aortic regurgitation were classified into three groups: Group I had normal Emax and stress-shortening relations, Group II had abnormal Emax but normal stress-shortening relations and Group III had abnormal Emax and stress-shortening relations.  The left ventricular end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes showed a progressive increase and the ejection fraction showed a progressive decrease from Group I to III; these values differed from those in the control patients (p less than 0.001).  In Group I, there was a decrease in left ventricular volumes (p less than 0.05) but no significant change in ejection fraction (61 +/- 7% versus 63 +/- 4%) after aortic valve replacement.  In contrast, in Group II, reduction in left ventricular volumes (p less than 0.01) was associated with an increase in ejection fraction from 50 +/- 8% to 64 +/- 11% (p less than 0.01).  Finally, in Group III, reduction in left ventricular volumes (p less than 0.05) was associated with a further decrement in ejection fraction from 35 +/- 13% to 30 +/- 13%.  Group I patients had compensated adequately for chronic volume overload.  However, Group II had left ventricular dysfunction that was associated with an increase in the left ventricular volume/mass ratio compared with that in the control patients and Group I (p less than 0.05 for both), suggesting inadequate hypertrophy and assumption of spherical geometry.  Finally, irreversible myocardial dysfunction had supervened in Group III.  In conclusion, a combined analysis of left ventricular chamber performance using the time-varying elastance concept and myocardial performance using conventional circumferential stress-shortening relations provides complementary information that elucidates differential mechanisms for left ventricular systolic dysfunction and therefore predicts the functional response to aortic valve replacement.
Impact of orifice geometry on the shape of jets: an in vitro Doppler color flow study.  To investigate the influence of orifice geometry on the three-dimensional shape of jets, an in vitro Doppler color flow study was performed.  Jets were formed by discharging blood through round orifices and through orifices with major/minor axis ratios of 2:1, 3:1 and 5:1.  These were repeated with orifice areas of 0.1, 0.3 and 0.5 cm2.  For turbulent and laminar jets formed by these orifices, Doppler color flow images were obtained from two orthogonal scanning planes aligned with the major and minor orifice axes.  Jet width was measured at 1 cm intervals from 0 to 5 cm from the orifice and used to calculate jet eccentricity (ratio of major to minor axis widths) and the rate of divergence of the jet walls.  Jets were observed to diverge more rapidly along walls aligned with the orifice minor axis rather than along the major axis.  This differential spreading led to the development of circular symmetry at a short distance from the orifice.  Jet divergence (theta) occurred more rapidly for turbulent jets and for jets formed by larger orifices: theta (zero) = 0.80 + 6.3.A + 7.0.T + 0.47.E-OR (r = 95, p less than 0.0001, n = 48), where A is orifice area (cm2); T is 0 for laminar jets, 1 for turbulent jets and E-OR combines orifice eccentricity and scanning orientation, ranging from -5 for 5:1 orifices imaged along the major axis, 0 for circular orifices to 5 for 5:1 orifices imaged along the minor axis.  Within the jet, eccentricity decayed approximately exponentially with distance from the orifice, more rapidly for turbulent jets, more slowly for the larger and more eccentric orifices.
Patient age and results of balloon aortic valvuloplasty: the Mansfield Scientific Registry experience. The Mansfield Scientific Aortic Valvuloplasty Registry Investigators.  Patients enrolled in the Mansfield Scientific Aortic Valvuloplasty Registry were followed up a mean of 7 months after balloon aortic valvuloplasty.  Results were compared for patients less than 70, 70 to 79 and greater than or equal to 80 years of age at time of valvuloplasty.  As assessed by aortic valve area indexed to body surface area, stenosis was more severe in the older patients and the incidence of congestive heart failure was also greater in those aged greater than or equal to 80 years.  The results of valvuloplasty were comparable in all three age groups, and indexed final valve area was not significantly different among the groups.  In-hospital mortality ranged from 4.2% to 9.4%, but this and other complications were not significantly different among the groups.  Total 7 month mortality was 23%.  As performed in this registry study, balloon aortic valvuloplasty produced similar results in older and younger patients, despite initially more severe disease in the older patients.
Drug response at electropharmacologic study in patients with ventricular tachyarrhythmias: the importance of ventricular refractoriness.  The clinical and electrophysiologic predictors of successful antiarrhythmic drug therapy for patients with inducible ventricular tachycardia were evaluated in 59 consecutive patients undergoing serial electropharmacologic trials.  Structural heart disease was less frequently present in patients for whom effective therapy was found (p less than 0.05).  The presence of coronary artery disease and a history of prior myocardial infarction were significantly more frequently present in patients for whom antiarrhythmic drug therapy could not be found (p less than 0.05).  The corrected QT interval and ventricular effective refractory period measured at a pacing cycle length of 400 ms were significantly shorter in responders compared with nonresponders (QT interval 428 +/- 52 versus 460 +/- 59 ms; ventricular effective refractory period 237 +/- 28 versus 254 +/- 24 ms; (p less than 0.05).  In addition, the interelectrogram coupling interval of the ventricular extrastimulus initiating ventricular tachycardia was significantly shorter in responders compared with nonresponders (223 +/- 37 versus 251 +/- 33 ms; p = 0.003).  Logistic regression analysis identified a short ventricular interelectrogram coupling interval (p less than 0.01) and absence of prior myocardial infarction (p less than 0.05) as the only independent predictors of antiarrhythmic drug suppression of the induction of ventricular tachycardia.  Greater drug-induced increments in the ventricular effective and functional refractory periods were observed in responders than in nonresponders as was the shortest ventricular interelectrogram coupling interval.  Thus, baseline electrophysiologic measurements identify patients with inducible ventricular tachycardia who are likely to respond to antiarrhythmic drug therapy.  Furthermore, these patients demonstrate greater drug-induced electrophysiologic changes.
Tricuspid valve dysplasia or displacement in intrauterine life.  In 450 cases of structural heart disease diagnosed prenatally, 38 fetuses (8.5%) had either a dysplastic or a displaced tricuspid valve.  The tricuspid valve was dysplastic in 22 fetuses, all of which had evidence of tricuspid regurgitation resulting in right atrial dilation and increased cardiothoracic ratio.  An associated abnormality of the pulmonary valve occurred in 16 fetuses.  The remaining 16 fetuses had Ebstein's malformation, 14 with evidence of tricuspid incompetence at presentation and 10 with an associated abnormality of the pulmonary valve.  Of the 38 cases, the pregnancy was interrupted in 17, spontaneous intrauterine fetal death occurred in 8, 11 infants died postnatally and 2 infants are still alive; additional abnormalities were found in 8 cases (chromosomal anomalies in 2, ventricular septal defects in 2, corrected transposition in 2, the Chiari malformation in 2, supraventricular tachycardia in 1 case and coarctation of the aorta in 1).  Fetuses with severe abnormalities are selected for fetal echocardiography by the four chamber screening program and a high rate of natural loss both in intrauterine life and immediately after birth was observed in the 21 cases in which pregnancy was continued.  This would explain the higher incidence of tricuspid valve disease in our prenatal compared with postnatal series.  Although increased cardiothoracic ratio and associated lesions of the right ventricular outflow tract contribute to the poor outcome in the cases detected prenatally, the absence of these features does not always indicate a good prognosis because progression of disease can occur with advancing gestational age.  No absolute measurement or single echocardiographic feature emerged as a consistent predictive factor of prognosis.
Anti-ischemic effects of atenolol versus nifedipine in patients with coronary artery disease and ambulatory silent ischemia.  The anti-ischemic effects of atenolol and nifedipine were compared in a randomized double-blind crossover manner in 24 patients with stable exertional angina and transient silent ischemia during ambulatory electrocardiographic (ECG) monitoring.  Both atenolol and nifedipine were effective (p less than 0.005) in reducing the average number and duration of transient ischemic events, but therapy with atenolol was associated with a significantly greater reduction in the mean number (p less than 0.05) and duration (p less than 0.01) of silent ischemic events.  Analyses of the silent ischemic activity during the morning hours revealed that only therapy with atenolol produced a significant reduction in the average duration per patient (139 +/- 54 vs.  1,609 +/- 468 s, p less than 0.01) and in the average duration of silent ischemia per event between 6 AM and 12 noon (62 +/- 21 vs.  208 +/- 24 s, p less than 0.005).  There were fewer adverse experiences during therapy with atenolol.  These results show that although both atenolol and nifedipine are effective in reducing silent ischemic events, treatment with atenolol is associated with significantly greater efficacy, particularly on the morning surge of silent myocardial ischemia.
Value of ventricular electrogram recordings in the diagnosis of arrhythmias precipitating electrical device shock therapy.  An antitachycardia pacemaker-cardioverter-defibrillator that is capable of storing ventricular electrograms before and after delivery of device shock therapy was implanted in 16 patients.  Three of the patients experienced out-of-hospital device shock therapy preceded by minimal symptoms.  Although limitations of electrogram analysis exist and are discussed, careful analysis and registration of electrograms during all supraventricular and ventricular rhythms observed during in-hospital testing served as an important reference for subsequent arrhythmia diagnosis.  By analyzing the electrogram rate and RR interval stability and configuration, a definitive diagnosis was established in all three patients (atrial fibrillation, polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and rate-sensing lead disruption, respectively).  Thus, the ability to store ventricular electrograms before shock therapy represents a major advance in the management of patients who receive an electrical device to treat ventricular tachyarrhythmia.
Case finding, data quality aspects and comparability of myocardial infarction registers: results of a south German register study.  The population-based Augsburg Coronary Event Register (330,000 residents, age 25-74 years) has registered a total of 1012 cases of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) in 1985 and 1021 AMI in 1986 and categorized them on the basis of the current WHO diagnostic algorithm for AMI.  The register is designed for longitudinal comparisons of annual AMI risk (incidence, attack rate, death rate), and the risk to the AMI patients themselves (28-day case fatality).  The methodology and specific issues encountered during registration and data evaluation are described.  With an estimated 95% completeness of case finding, the quality control data review which the register conducts annually shows a consistency of specific data structures which indicate stable case finding and validation procedures.  However, local conditions which affect case finding and data completeness per case are responsible for the creation of subsets of AMI which are in turn distinguished by differences in diagnostic category structures.  With regard to the study objectives, the differences among subsets appear to have the least effect on rate calculations if DEFINITE and POSSIBLE AMI are combined.  The implications of methodological variations and subset differences within and across registers on annual rate calculations and result comparisons are discussed.
Sequential or fixed sample trial design? A case study by stochastic simulation.  The properties of Wilcoxon's rank sum test for fixed sample size and a Wilcoxon-type two-sample sequential test have been illustrated and compared by means of stochastic simulation.  Data from a real fixed sample trial have been used, both for resampling from the original data, and for construction of an idealized theoretical distribution.  The sequential and the fixed sample test obtain equal power, but the sequential test mostly includes considerably fewer patients to reach a conclusion, i.e.  the mean and median number of patients included are both much lower than the fixed sample size.  Under the hypotheses only a small fraction of the simulation runs exceed the fixed sample size.  These findings exemplify results obtained in theoretical analyses and simulation studies covering a wide range of distributions.  In our opinion sequential tests have obvious advantages and are in many cases better alternatives than fixed sample tests in clinical trials.
Inability to demonstrate physiologic correlates of subjective improvement among patients taught the relaxation response.  OBJECTIVE: To assess whether the regular elicitation of the relaxation response produces sustained physiologic changes coincident with symptomatic relief or improved psychological state.  DESIGN: Prospective, cohort pilot study.  SETTING: Clinical research center within a teaching hospital.  PATIENTS: Thirteen athletic men, mean age 44.8 years, with borderline or labile hypertension, taking no medication.  All 13 completed the study.  INTERVENTIONS: Three baseline assessments of psychological state, symptom checklist, and assessment of autonomic response to infusion of beta agonist (isoproterenol).  Daily relaxation response exercises for five consecutive weeks followed by repeat assessment of all parameters.  Discontinuation of relaxation exercises for subsequent five weeks followed by repeat assessment of all parameters.  Measurements and main results: After eliciting the relaxation response, subjects demonstrated significant decreases in anxiety (p less than 0.014) and somatic symptoms (p less than 0.02).  Psychological and somatic variables returned toward baseline after the subsequent discontinuation of relaxation exercises.  No significant concomitant change in urinary catecholamines, heart rate response to isoproterenol, blood pressure, pulse rate, or serum cholesterol was demonstrated.  CONCLUSION: The regular elicitation of the relaxation response can improve psychological performance and reduce symptoms.  However, the physiologic mechanism whereby these psychological and symptomatic improvements occur remains poorly understood and warrants further investigation.
Cardiac performance in infants referred for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.  We performed cardiac evaluations in 59 infants referred for severe lung disease to determine whether cardiac performance was impaired in those requiring extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO).  Infants were divided into two groups: group 1 (n = 25) received conventional therapy and group 2 (n = 34) received ECMO therapy after meeting established criteria.  Ventilatory and oxygenation indexes and estimates of right ventricular systolic pressure were measured.  Load-dependent and load-independent echocardiographic indexes of cardiac performance were also measured.  The infants in the two groups had similar diagnoses, age, weight, inotropic support, ventilator and oxygenation indexes on admission, and survival.  Heart rate and estimates of preload and afterload were similar in the two groups.  Ventricular shortening fraction was 36.1 +/- 7.6% in group 1 and 40.5 +/- 8.8% in group 2 (p value was not significant).  Velocity of circumferential fiber shortening (VCF/sec) was 1.41 +/- 0.35 in group 1 and 1.58 +/- 0.39 in group 2 (p value was not significant).  The relationship between wall stress and ventricular shortening was similar in the two groups.  There were no differences in cardiac output.  Pulmonary artery pressure was estimated to be 56 +/- 13 mm Hg in group 1 and 63 +/- 10 mm Hg in group 2 (p = 0.017).  Thus no significant differences were found in load-dependent or load-independent measures of cardiac performance in infants with severe lung disease treated with ECMO or conventional therapy.  We conclude that cardiac failure is not the primary cause of clinical deterioration in infants with severe lung disease who require ECMO therapy.
Abdominal aortic aneurysm: results of a family study.  Data pertaining to abdominal aortic aneurysm among first-degree relatives of 91 patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm are presented.  The percentage of families with at least one affected first-degree relative of the proband (multiplex families) was 15.4%.  In 21.4% of multiplex families parent-offspring transmission of abdominal aortic aneurysm was noted; in the remaining families only siblings were affected.  The mean age at onset among probands was 67.3 years; that among all affected was 67.4 years.  No statistically significant difference in the mean ages at onset between genders was noted.  Among affected siblings of probands, the sex ratio, male:female, was 1.33:1, which is not significantly different from 1:1.  The relative risk of developing an abdominal aortic aneurysm was 3.97 for fathers, 4.03 for mothers, 9.92 for brothers, and 22.93 for sisters.
Revascularization of an ischemic limb by use of a muscle pedicle flap: a rabbit model.  A rabbit model of hind limb ischemia was designed to demonstrate that new, hemodynamically significant arterial connections will develop between ischemic skeletal muscle and an independently perfused muscle pedicle flap.  The right common iliac artery was divided in 15 rabbits.  In eight rabbits a muscle flap based on the left deep inferior epigastric artery was transposed to the right thigh (flap group).  In seven rabbits a sham operation was performed where the flap was sutured to the abdominal wall (sham group).  After 7 days angiography demonstrated arterial connections between the flap and the native limb circulation in all of the flap group animals.  The flap increased muscle perfusion in the ischemic limb (2.99 ml/100 gm muscle/minute in the flap group, vs 2.06 ml/100 gm muscle/minute in the sham group, p less than 0.005).  Hemodynamically significant vascular connections will develop between a well-perfused muscle flap and an ischemic limb.  The augmentation in perfusion provided by these connections can be quantified.
Limitations of magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasound-directed (duplex) scanning in the diagnosis of subclavian vein thrombosis.  To investigate the potential role of magnetic resonance imaging and duplex scanning in the diagnosis of catheter-induced subclavian vein thrombosis, we correlated the results of 43 arm phlebograms with duplex scans; 28 of these phlebograms were also correlated with magnetic resonance imaging scans of the thoracic veins.  Eighteen of the 43 phlebograms were normal, and all had normal magnetic resonance imaging and duplex studies.  Eleven subclavian veins were totally occluded on phlebography; all had duplex scans, and five were also scanned with magnetic resonance imaging.  Duplex scans detected 6 of 11 occlusions, whereas magnetic resonance imaging detected 4 of the 5 occlusions scanned.  The five occlusions that were not detected by either magnetic resonance imaging or duplex scans were short segmental occlusions of the medial one third of the left subclavian vein.  Of 14 nonocclusive thrombi seen on phlebography, duplex scans correctly identified 8.  Magnetic resonance imaging was done on eight nonocclusive thrombi but identified only two.  All abnormal findings on duplex scanning and magnetic resonance imaging were confirmed by phlebography.  Short occlusions of the proximal portion of the left subclavian vein were often undetected by duplex scanning but occasionally seen with magnetic resonance imaging.  Neither modality was sensitive to the presence of nonocclusive mural thrombi.  Magnetic resonance imaging is highly reliable in ruling out the presence of a thrombotic process in the subclavian vein, but it may on occasion fail to detect the presence of subclavian thrombi.  For this reason, in cases with suspected subclavian vein thrombosis magnetic resonance imaging cannot be used as the only diagnostic modality.
Skewflap versus long posterior flap in below-knee amputations: multicenter trial.  A multicenter trial of alternative techniques for below-knee amputation is described in which surgeons in 11 centers randomized 191 patients with end-stage occlusive vascular disease to two different methods of stump construction.  The skewflap technique was performed in 98 and the long posterior flap was performed in 93.  The two groups were well matched in respect to age, sex, smoking, diabetes, and indications for amputation.  Early outcome was compared in terms of 30-day mortality rate: skew 11 (11%) deaths versus long posterior flap 16 (17%); the state of the wound at 1 week (primary healing 60% in both groups); the need for surgical revision at the same level 7 (7%) versus 7 (8%), and revision to a higher level 10 (10%) versus 7 (8%).  Follow-up information at 6 months was available from records or by mailed questionnaire in 188 (98%) at 6 months, 20 died during that interval.  It showed that a prosthetic limb was fitted to 64 (84%) of skew flaps and 50 (77%) of long posterior flaps.  Walking, alone or with support, was achieved in 59 (78%) and 46 (71%), respectively.  None of these differences reached statistical significance.  It is concluded that the skew flap is just as effective as the long posterior flap and is an excellent option for below-knee amputation.
Suggested standards for reporting on arterial aneurysms. Subcommittee on Reporting Standards for Arterial Aneurysms, Ad Hoc Committee on Reporting Standards, Society for Vascular Surgery and North American Chapter, International Society for Cardiovascular Surgery.  The literature on arterial aneurysms is subject to potential misinterpretation because of inconsistencies in reporting standards.  The joint councils of the Society for Vascular Surgery and the North American Chapter of the International Society for Cardiovascular Surgery appointed an ad hoc committee to address this issue.  This communication, prepared in response to the need for standardized reporting, defines and classifies arterial aneurysms and recommends standards for describing the causes, manifestations, treatment, and outcome criteria that are important when publishing data on aneurysmal disease.
Antihypertensive therapy. To stop or not to stop?  The benefits of continuous antihypertensive therapy have been extensively documented.  However, lack of compliance with the prescribed regimen, excessive cost, and troublesome adverse effects of some antihypertensive agents led to the consideration of intermittent therapy or even complete discontinuation of therapy as an effective alternative to lifelong medication.  Prospective studies dealing with this subject reported inconsistent results.  Nevertheless, they allowed us to identify selection criteria of candidates for step-down or discontinuation of antihypertensive therapy.  Such candidates include patients with mild essential hypertension who have one or more of the following characteristics: young age, normal body weight, low salt intake, no alcohol consumption, low pretreatment blood pressure, successful therapy with one drug only, and no or only minimal signs of target organ damage.  Stopping antihypertensive therapy without subsequent rise in arterial pressure was shown to be possible in a subset of patients with mild essential hypertension for a period of months to years.  This approach appears to be safe, provided that blood pressure is monitored frequently, and may improve compliance, save treatment costs, and reduce adverse effects of certain drugs, although its long-term consequences for morbidity and mortality remain to be determined.
Comparison of two levels of anticoagulant therapy in patients with substitute heart valves   After cardiac valve replacement patients were blindly randomized into two groups, both receiving aspirin (330 mg) and dipyridamole (75 mg) twice daily and the oral anticoagulant acenocoumarol (Sintrom).  An international normalized ratio of 2.0 to 2.99 was assigned to group A and 3.0 to 4.5 to group B; both groups were subsequently analyzed for thromboembolic and hemorrhagic complications.  Final evaluation included 51 and 48 patients, respectively.  The follow-up was 626 months for group A (12.3 months/patient) and 486 months for group B (10.1 months/patient).  The frequency of thromboembolism was equal in both groups: one transient ischemic attack in group A (a rate of 1.92/100 patient-years) and two transient ischemic attacks in group B (a rate of 4.94/100 patient-years).  There was, however, a statistical difference in bleeding complications between the two groups (p less than 0.02).  Two patients bled in group A, a rate of 3.9% (3.8/100 patient-years), which represents an incidence of one episode each 25.6 years of treatment; 10 patients bled in group B, a rate of 20.8% (24.7/100 patient-years) representing an incidence of one episode each 4 years of treatment.  We conclude that an international normalized ratio of 2 to 3 is safer than a ratio of 3 to 4.5 and confers good protection from thromboembolism when oral anticoagulant therapy is used conjointly with platelet function-inhibiting drugs in patients with mechanical substitute heart valves.
Analysis and predictors of pulmonary vascular resistance after cardiac transplantation.  Elevated pulmonary vascular resistance is a known risk factor for early death from acute right ventricular failure after orthotopic cardiac transplantation.  Patients in whom the elevated pulmonary vascular resistance is due primarily to increased left atrial pressure ("reactive") frequently have normalization of resistance after transplantation, but few studies have detailed the time course and magnitude of these changes.  To analyze the response of pulmonary vascular resistance to cardiac transplantation, we analyzed data from 4353 right heart catheterizations on all 182 patients undergoing cardiac transplantation between 1981 and Jan.  1, 1990.  Before transplantation 18% of patients had a pulmonary vascular resistance greater than 4 WU, 16% had a pulmonary artery systolic pressure greater than 60 mm Hg, and 16% had a transpulmonary gradient greater than 14 mm Hg.  In the overall group of patients, pulmonary vascular resistance (mean value 2.63 WU), transpulmonary gradient (mean value 9.9 mm Hg), and pulmonary artery systolic pressure (mean value 48.0 mm Hg) were normalized within 1 week of cardiac transplantation.  In patients with a high preoperative pulmonary vascular resistance (greater than or equal to 4 WU), the resistance fell promptly within 1 week of transplantation but continued to be slightly elevated throughout the period of follow-up.  By multiple regression analysis, pulmonary vascular resistance at 1 week and 1 year after transplantation was significantly correlated with the pretransplantation resistance.  Pulmonary vascular resistance anytime after transplantation was related to preoperative resistance, body surface area, and pulmonary artery diastolic pressure.  Inferences: (1) As a group, cardiac transplant recipients have a normal pulmonary vascular resistance, transpulmonary gradient, and pulmonary artery systolic pressure within 1 week after transplantation with little change thereafter for at least several years.  (2) Patients with reversible elevation of pulmonary vascular resistance before cardiac transplantation typically have a reactive and a fixed component.  Cardiac transplantation relieves the reactive but not the fixed component.  As a result, pulmonary vascular resistance early (within 1 week) and late after transplantation will have fallen but not completely normalized.
The mechanism of heart failure caused by cardiac allograft rejection.  Rejection of the cardiac allograft is often associated with reversible myocardial failure, the mechanism of which is not understood.  We have examined this phenomenon in a small animal model that provides the opportunity for multimodality study of the rejection process.  Heterotopic cardiac transplantation was performed in the Lewis rat with Lewis X Brown-Norway (allografts) or Lewis (isografts) donors.  Without immunosuppression, allografts are completely rejected in 6 to 8 days.  At 3 days cardiac grafts were explanted and mounted on a modified Langendorff apparatus for functional measurements or submitted for pathologic examination and biochemical determination of high-energy phosphates.  Three-day isografts (n = 9) had minimal histologic changes.  Pathologic examination of 3-day allografts (n = 13) showed lymphocytic infiltrate and myocyte necrosis, histologic features for which antirejection treatment is usually given clinically.  For grafts subjected to functional studies (n = 11), heart rate, cardiac output, coronary flow, and stroke work were determined at baseline and in response to isoproterenol (3 x 10(-8) mol/ml).  Three-day allografts (n = 6) and isografts (n = 5) had similar baseline function.  The chronotropic response to isoproterenol was similar in allografts and isografts, but allografts had diminished cardiac output and stroke work after isoproterenol.  Adenosine triphosphate levels were normal (41.9 nmol/mg) in 3-day allografts (n = 4).  We have evaluated functional, biochemical, and pathologic changes associated with myocardial dysfunction during heterotopic cardiac transplant rejection in a small animal.  This model reproducibly demonstrates diminished contractile reserve in 3-day allografts with normal baseline function and high-energy stores but histologically significant rejection.
Mitral valve repair by replacement of chordae tendineae with polytetrafluoroethylene sutures.  Expanded polytetrafluoroethylene sutures have been used for replacement of diseased chordae tendineae during reconstructive procedures on the mitral valve in 43 patients.  There were 28 men and 15 women whose mean age was 55 years, range 21 to 76.  Three fourths of the patients were in New York Heart Association class III or IV.  Replacement of primary chordae tendineae of the anterior leaflet was performed with 4-0 or 5-0 polytetrafluoroethylene sutures.  A double-armed suture was passed twice through the fibrous portion of the papillary muscle head and tied down.  Each arm of the suture was brought up to the free margin of the leaflet and passed through the area where the native chorda was attached.  After the lengths of the two arms were adjusted, the ends were tied together on the ventricular side of the leaflet.  Thirty patients had degenerative disease of the mitral valve; the incompetence was due to prolapse of the anterior leaflet in 14 patients and prolapse of the anterior and posterior leaflets in 16.  Eleven patients had rheumatic mitral valve disease: four had stenosis, three had regurgitation, and four had mixed lesions.  Two patients had ischemic mitral regurgitation caused by rupture of a papillary muscle head.  There were no operative deaths.  Patients have been followed up from 5 to 61 months, mean 13.  Doppler echocardiographic studies were performed at regular intervals after the operation and revealed normal mitral valve function in most patients There were two failures that necessitated mitral valve replacement: one because of acute mitral regurgitation and the other because of hemolysis.  There have been two late deaths, neither one valve related.  Replacement of chordae tendineae with polytetrafluoroethylene sutures is simple and allows for reconstruction of the mitral valve in many patients who would otherwise require mitral valve replacement.  Because our patients have been followed up for a limited time, the long-term results of this procedure remain unknown.
Alcohol and pyruvate cardioplegia. Twenty-four-hour in situ preservation of hamster hearts.  Isolated hamster hearts were first perfused with a normal Krebs-Henseleit medium to demonstrate comparable viability of hearts before perfusing and storing them for 24 hours in one of three solutions.  The three solutions were a physiologic saline with pyruvate as the substrate and 4% alcohol to arrest the heart (group 1), a standard cardioplegic solution (group 2), and an alcohol-free physiologic saline with pyruvate as the substrate (group 3).  Recovery in terms of rate/pressure product and oxygen consumption after 30 minutes of reperfusion was 81% and 93%, respectively, for group 1, 13% and 32% for group 2, and 70% and 72% for group 3.  Percent of physiologic recovery was not related to recovery of adenosine triphosphate.  The adenosine triphosphate level returned to approximately 40% control level in all three groups, and in all three groups inorganic phosphate remained approximately 320% over control level after 30 minutes of reperfusion.  Phosphocreatine level significantly higher in groups 1 and 3 than in group 2, as a result of improved oxygen consumption.  Intracellular pH, determined by phosphorous 31 nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, was physiologic in groups 1 and 3 but alkaline in group 2.  This alkalinity may have been caused by leaky membranes.  Pyruvate helped preserve mitochondrial function during depressed oxygen delivery, such as was seen during the 24-hour storage period.  Four percent alcohol arrested the heart; combined with pyruvate plus alcohol solution were better than a standard cardioplegic solution for maintaining functional capability.
The dynamics of antegrade cardioplegia with simultaneous coronary sinus occlusion. Effects on aortic root infusion pressure, coronary sinus pressure, and myocardial cooling.  It has been suggested that antegrade cardioplegia with coronary sinus occlusion improves homogeneous myocardial cooling and reduces myocardial injury in the presence of coronary artery occlusion.  Little data are available on the exact relationships among the basic elements or this intervention, including antegrade infusion rate, aortic root pressure, the degree of coronary sinus occlusion, coronary sinus pressure, and myocardial cooling.  The purpose of this study was to determine these relationships and to provide some basic guidelines for better understanding of this intervention.  Twenty-two sheep were placed on cardiopulmonary bypass, the distal left anterior descending artery was occluded, and the proximal coronary sinus was snared.  Sixteen combinations of infusion rate (3, 5, 7, or 9 ml/kg/min) and coronary sinus occlusion (total, subtotal, or moderate occlusion or no occlusion) were adopted for each 2 minutes of antegrade cardioplegia, yielding 96 measurements.  Myocardial temperatures in the occluded and nonoccluded regions, aortic root infusion pressure, and coronary sinus pressure were measured during each infusion of cardioplegic solution.  Coronary sinus occlusion was then released, and the whole heart was reperfused for 30 minutes for another infusion of cardioplegic solution and measurements.  Results showed good degrees of linearity between infusion rate and aortic root infusion pressure for all coronary sinus occlusion and noninfusion groups (p less than 0.01).  A positive effect of coronary sinus occlusion on aortic root infusion pressure was observed.  The graded increases in infusion rate with various degrees of coronary sinus occlusion were constantly associated with elevation of coronary sinus pressure (p less than 0.01).  It was also noted that myocardial temperatures in the region of the occluded left anterior descending artery were significantly lower in coronary sinus occlusion groups than in nonocclusion groups (p less than 0.01 or 0.05).  Myocardial temperature in the nonoccluded region decreased significantly with the stepwise increases in infusion rate (p less than 0.01), but not with the increases in coronary sinus occlusion (not significant).  Based on this and previous studies, we recommend that the induced coronary sinus pressure be safely maintained in the range of 25 to 35 mm Hg and that further studies be focused on the infusion rate of 5 ml/kg/min with subtotal or total coronary sinus occlusion for the intervention of antegrade cardioplegia plus coronary sinus occlusion.
Freehand allograft aortic valve replacement and aortic root replacement. Utility of intraoperative echocardiography and Doppler color flow mapping.  Seventeen consecutive patients undergoing 20 planned aortic valve replacements with allograft valves at Stanford University Medical Center were studied with intraoperative epicardial echocardiography and Doppler color flow mapping before and after cardiopulmonary bypass.  Native aortic valves were replaced in 12 of the 20 patients, and eight patients underwent second aortic valve procedures.  In 17 of 20 patients allograft selection was guided by prebypass echocardiographic estimates of annular diameter and/or length of allograft aortic root required.  Other prebypass findings included unanticipated severe mitral regurgitation in one patient (which precluded allograft aortic valve replacement), left-to-right shunts in five patients, ascending aortic dissection in one, and aortic root disease necessitating coronary reimplantation or bypass in two.  Postbypass echocardiography demonstrated acceptable competency of 18 of 19 allograft valves (mild or no aortic insufficiency).  Postbypass echocardiography also documented successful repair of four of five shunts and mild mitral regurgitation in 15 of 19 patients (versus 11 of 19 before bypass).  Conclusions: Intraoperative echocardiography-Doppler mapping is a useful adjunct for allograft aortic valve or aortic root replacement; it allows confident selection of appropriate tissue size before aortic cross clamping, which minimizes delay from allograft thawing procedures.  It also provides helpful information about the extent of aortic root disease and coronary ostial anatomy before bypass, confirms allograft competency after bypass, and detects accompanying valvular and other hemodynamic lesions before and after allograft valve replacement.
Deprivation in infancy or in adult life: which is more important for mortality risk?   Previous ecological studies have suggested that early life factors are important causes of adult cardiovascular and respiratory disease, by showing geographic correlations between past infant mortality rates and present adult mortality rates.  However, these studies inadequately take account of the fact that areas which were severely deprived earlier this century remain the most deprived today.  Thus the ecological relation between infant and adult mortality rates could simply reflect persistence in the geographic distribution of poor socioeconomic circumstances.  To explore this hypothesis further infant mortality rates for 1895-1908 for 43 counties in England and Wales were correlated with cause-specific adult mortality for 1969-73 in people aged 65-74 years, with and without adjustment for present-day social deprivation and social class.  The strong simple correlations found between infant mortality in 1895-1908 and adult mortality from various causes in 1969-73 were generally much attenuated or abolished by controlling for indices of present-day socioeconomic circumstances.  Our results suggest that previous studies give no strong support for any direct influence of factors acting in early life on adult coronary heart disease mortality risk.  Studies which gather data about infancy, childhood, and the full course of adult life are required to clarify this issue.
Raynaud's syndrome. Using a range of therapies to help patients.  Raynaud's syndrome is a common medical problem.  Approach to diagnosis must involve a search for underlying causes.  Treatment includes avoidance of precipitating factors, biofeedback, and possibly pharmacologic therapy, after careful consideration of risks.
Heart transplantation in patients with severe pulmonary hypertension and increased pulmonary vascular resistance.  Irreversibly increased pulmonary vascular resistance is a contraindication for cardiac transplantation.  At our hospital patients referred for recipient evaluation with systolic pulmonary artery pressure greater than 50 mmHg and pulmonary vascular resistance greater than 2 Wood units (Wu) are tested with intravenous sodium nitroprusside for reversibility.  In 23 patients whose increased systolic pulmonary artery pressure (67.4 +/- 10.4 mmHg) and resistance (4.8 +/- 2.4 Wu) were reduced by nitroprusside, orthotopic heart transplantation was performed without early mortality.  Right heart catheterization after transplantation revealed a significant and persistent fall of the elevated pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance.  We conclude that if severe pulmonary hypertension and elevated pulmonary vascular resistance are reversible with nitroprusside, the patient can safely undergo heart transplantation.
Ultrastructural changes in rat hearts following cold cardioplegic ischemia of differing duration and differing modes of reperfusion.  Morphologic consequences of prolonged global hypothermic (15 degrees C), cardioplegic ischemia and two reperfusion techniques were studied in Langendorff-perfused rat hearts.  A 'gentle' reperfusion technique, with gradual rise in perfusate temperature and pressure to physiologic levels over 30 min, was used for 12 hearts following 2-hour or 3 1/2-hour (6 in each group) ischemia.  Abrupt reperfusion, with perfusate at 37 degrees C and 70 mmHg, was performed on 13 hearts (6 ischemic for 2 hours and 7 for 3 1/2 hours).  Six nonischemic, perfused hearts served as controls.  Randomly selected specimens from the left ventricle after 45-60 min reperfusion were prepared for transmission electron microscopy.  Volume fractions of myocardial structural components were calculated from stereologic point-counting on the electron micrographs.  Two-way analysis of variance revealed that interstitial edema developed with increasing ischemic time and was not influenced by reperfusion technique.  The degree of endothelial damage was independent of ischemic time, but was lessened by 'gentle' reperfusion.  Both mitochondrial injury and myocyte edema were less when perfusate temperature and pressure were slowly raised after 3 1/2-hour ischemia.
Coronary trapping of a complement activation product (C3a des-Arg) during myocardial reperfusion in open-heart surgery.  Accumulation of complement factors has been found to occur in the myocardium after infarction.  We studied the possibility that the complement activation product C3a des-Arg is trapped within the coronary circulation during reperfusion of the ischemic myocardium.  In 11 patients undergoing routine coronary artery bypass grafting, arterial blood was sampled before, during and after cardiopulmonary bypass.  Blood was drawn from the coronary sinus concomitantly with arterial blood sampling 5 and 30 min after release of the aortic cross-clamp (n = 10).  From a preoperative value of 92 +/- 13 ng/ml, C3a des-Arg rose during CPB to a maximum of 1816 +/- 393 at the end of CPB.  Following reperfusion for 5 min, C3a des-Arg was 1284 +/- 232 ng/ml in arterial and 1106 +/- 100 in coronary sinus blood, a significant difference (p less than 0.05).  The amount of C3a des-Arg trapped in the heart at 5-min reperfusion showed positive correlation with its arterial concentration (p less than 0.05).  No significant difference was found after 30 min of reperfusion.  Complement activation products trapped in the heart in the early reperfusion period may play a pathogenetic role in myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury.
Subacute poisoning with phosalone, an organophosphate insecticide.  An illness characterized by weakness, dizziness, and gastrointestinal symtoms was identified among a crew of 30 migrant field-workers employed by a grape grower in Madera County, California, during August 1987.  The onset of symptoms occurred between August 24 and August 30 and a median of 9 days from the date of first employment.  The first crew member sought medical treatment on August 26, and 10 crew members were admitted to hospital between August 27 and August 30.  For most workers, gastrointestinal and constitutional symptoms resolved shortly after admission, but 4 patients had episodes of severe sinus bradycardia persisting for several days.  On the day of admission, transient atrioventricular dissociation developed in 2 persons.  Interviews with 16 crew members not admitted to the hospital identified only 1 additional worker ill with gastrointestinal symptoms, but all 16 had moderate to severe inhibition of both plasma and red blood cell cholinesterase.  Four other workers who were tested but not interviewed also had cholinesterase depression.  The crew had had exposure since August 19 to the organophosphate insecticide phosalone, which was last applied to the vineyard on July 21, or 29 days earlier.  Although this is the first report unequivocally linking phosalone to field-worker poisoning, the delayed onset and nonspecific nature of the symptoms associated with subacute poisoning may have hindered the recognition of previous similar episodes.
New developments in cardiopulmonary resuscitation.  Since the last revision of the American Heart Association's guidelines in 1985, several new developments of clinical importance have occurred in the field of cardiopulmonary resuscitation.  These include enhanced access to and earlier use of defibrillation, the use of high-dose epinephrine when standard doses fail, the assessment of resuscitative efforts with end-tidal CO2 monitoring and the addition of two new drugs, amiodarone (for refractory ventricular fibrillation) and adenosine (for paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia).  Time will determine the ultimate role of these advancements in the management of cardiac arrest.
Late streptokinase infusion and antithrombotic treatment in myocardial infarction reduce subsequent myocardial ischemia.  Of 255 consecutive patients with acute myocardial infarction, 111 were eligible for attempted late thrombolysis.  They were randomly assigned to either thrombolytic and antithrombotic treatment (treatment group) or routine treatment (control group).  Patients in the treatment group received streptokinase initiated late (mean 32 hours; range 12 to 49) after the onset of symptoms, followed by heparin infusion for at least 5 days and warfarin and dipyridamole for at least 3 months.  Patients were examined clinically and by bicycle ergometry on discharge from the hospital and after 3 and 12 months.  The two groups did not differ with respect to deaths or reinfarctions.  There was a trend toward a lower incidence of angina pectoris in the treatment group.  Exercise tolerance in this group was significantly higher than in the control group (at 3 months 124 +/- 39 W vs 107 +/- 41 W; p less than 0.05).  The difference was entirely accounted for by patients with no previous history of infarction or angina pectoris (at 3 months 142 +/- 37 W vs 112 +/- 45 W; p = 0.01).  ECG signs of myocardial ischemia, silent or symptomatic, occurred at significantly lower levels of exercise among patients in the control group compared with patients in the treatment group.  The results support the notion that thrombolytic therapy given as late as 12 to 49 hours after the onset of symptoms may reduce the incidence of residual ischemia during the postinfarction period.
Immediate regional endocardial surface expansion following coronary occlusion in the canine left ventricle: disproportionate effects of anterior versus inferior ischemia.  The exact time of onset of functional expansion after acute myocardial infarction/ischemia remains unclear in spite of its potential link to chronic pathologic infarct expansion and its potential implications for therapy.  To examine this early change in ventricular morphology, 14 open-chest dogs were studied with two-dimensional echocardiography before and after occlusion (10 minutes) of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD, n = 7) or circumflex artery (CIRC, n = 7).  The endocardial surface area (ESA) and the area of abnormal wall motion (AWM) were reconstructed from the echocardiographic data using a previously reported technique for quantitatively mapping the ESA and extent of AWM.  For the total group (N = 14), the mean ESA before occlusion was 48.9 +/- 9.8 cm2, increasing to 65.7 +/- 18.9 cm2 at 10 minutes occlusion (p less than 0.001).  For the LAD subgroup, the mean ESA before occlusion was 50.7 +/- 9.3 cm2, increasing to 79.1 +/- 14.1 cm2 at 10 minutes following occlusion (p less than 0.001).  For the CIRC subgroup, the mean ESA before occlusion was 47.1 +/- 10.8 cm2, increasing to 52.3 +/- 12.6 cm2 at 10 minutes after occlusion (p less than 0.001).  The ESA increase for the LAD subgroup was significantly larger than that of the CIRC subgroup (LAD range 14.5 to 49.9 cm2 versus CIRC range 1.5 to 9 cm2, p less than 0.0001).  Coronary occlusion resulted in similarly sized regions of AWM for both subgroups (LAD, 31.3 +/- 12.2 cm2 versus CIRC, 25.9 +/- 10.3 cm2, p = n.s.).  For the LAD group, the largest increase in endocardial circumference occurred within the zone of AWM at the apex (39.9 +/- 12%).  The endocardial surface area therefore expands immediately after coronary occlusion and the magnitude of this process is primarily related to the site (anteroapical) rather than to the extent of AWM.
Detection of myocardial infarction in the presence of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome by QRST isoarea map in dogs.  The possibility of detecting myocardial infarction (MI) in the presence of Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome by means of body surface QRST isoarea maps was studied in eight dogs.  Eighty-seven body surface ECGs were recorded simultaneously.  Recordings were taken during right atrial (RA) and right atrial and right ventricular (RA + RV) sequential pacing, which simulated WPW syndrome, during control periods and at 1-hour intervals for up to 5 hours after occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary artery.  In ECGs during the RA drive, diagnostic findings of MI such as abnormal Q waves were observed but became obscure during the RA + RV drive.  On the contrary, the QRST values over the anterior chest during both drives were positive soon after coronary occlusion, decreased gradually as time passed, and became abnormally negative after 5 hours.  The QRST isoarea maps during RA and RA + RV pacing showed quite similar patterns and were highly correlated with each other throughout this study (r greater than 0.95).  These findings demonstrate that localized abnormalities resulting from MI are evident in QRST isoarea maps even in the presence of preexcitation and fusion.
Acute reduction of mitral valve area after percutaneous balloon mitral valvuloplasty: assessment with Doppler continuity equation method.  Mitral valve areas before and after balloon mitral valvuloplasty were serially determined by the Doppler continuity equation method in 16 patients.  Ultrasound examinations were performed before and immediately after balloon inflation and 24 hours, 1 week, and 1 month after valvuloplasty.  Mitral valve area determined by the Doppler continuity equation method correlated well with that determined at catheterization by the Gorlin formula, not only before but also immediately after balloon inflation (y = 0.87 x + 0.05, standard error of estimate = 0.22 cm2, r = 0.90).  Serial calculation of mitral valve area by the Doppler continuity equation method showed a slight but significant decrease in the valve area at 24 hours after balloon mitral valvuloplasty but no change after that.  We conclude that the Doppler continuity equation method provides an accurate estimation of mitral valve area before and even after balloon valvuloplasty.  Mitral valve area dilated by balloon inflation is decreased slightly within 24 hours after the procedure, which corroborates valve stretch as one mechanism for increasing mitral valve area with balloon valvuloplasty.  Estimation of mitral valve area immediately after balloon mitral valvuloplasty may overestimate the long-term efficacy of the procedure.
Acute hemodynamic effects of intravenous diperdipine, a new dihydropyridine derivative, in coronary heart disease.  The acute hemodynamic effects of a new dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker, diperdipine, which is suitable for intravenous administration, were studied by right and left cardiac catheterization in 16 patients with coronary heart disease.  Diperdipine markedly reduced systemic vascular resistance and improved stroke index and left ventricular ejection fraction.  Mean pulmonary artery and wedge pressures were slightly increased as a possible consequence of enhanced venous return, whereas right atrial and left ventricular end-diastolic pressures were not significantly changed.  Nevertheless, an increase in preload was clearly indicated by an augmented left ventricular end-diastolic volume index after administration of diperdipine.  Left ventricular contractility, which was estimated by the end-systolic pressure-volume ratio and by dP/dt max was not significantly changed, though analysis of individual data suggests a minimally negative inotropic effect.  However, such a minor effect on left ventricular contractility was largely counterbalanced by the marked reduction of afterload, which produced a sharp improvement of stroke index.  Enhancement of left ventricular ejection fraction and reduction in systemic vascular resistance were inversely and directly correlated to control values.  Overall, diperdipine was well tolerated, but one patient had a major untoward reaction that consisted of an ischemic episode that was possibly related to drug administration.  In conclusion, intravenous diperdipine appears to be a potent arteriolar dilating agent that does not affect left ventricular contractility.
Ultra short-acting intravenous beta-adrenergic blockade as add-on therapy in acute unstable angina.  To assess the efficacy and safety of the ultra short-acting beta-blocking agent, esmolol, in acute unstable angina, we administered esmolol to 21 patients who had persistent angina despite conventional medical therapy.  Following a baseline Doppler echocardiographic examination, esmolol was titrated to reduce the rate-pressure product by at least 20%.  Once the patients had been receiving a maintenance dosage for 30 minutes, Doppler echocardiographic studies were repeated.  Mean esmolol dose at target response was 17 +/- 16 mg/min, with the dosage range of 8 to 24 mg/min.  Esmolol was effective in alleviating anginal chest pain in 18 of the 21 patients.  Seven patients eventually underwent percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) and eight had coronary bypass surgery.  The remainder were discharged receiving medical therapy including oral beta-blockade.  During esmolol therapy, heart rate and blood pressure decreased significantly (86 +/- 14 to 68 +/- 12 beats/min and 125 +/- 16 to 103 +/- 20 mm Hg, both p less than 0.001).  Cardiac output decreased from 5.4 +/- 1.3 to 4.5 +/- 1.1 L/min (p less than 0.001) secondary to a decrease in heart rate as stroke volume remained unchanged.  Left ventricular ejection fraction increased from 47 +/- 12 to 49 +/- 13 with esmolol therapy, although this change was not statistically significant.  Both the one third filling fraction as well as E/A ratio (ratio of early-to-late diastolic filling velocities) increased with esmolol therapy (35 +/- 8% to 38 +/- 8% and 0.73 +/- 0.2 to 0.85 +/- 0.23, both p less than 0.005), indicating improvement in left ventricular diastolic function.
Improvement of systolic and diastolic left ventricular wall motion by serial echocardiograms in selected patients treated for unstable angina.  The purpose of the study was to evaluate the effect of antiischemic treatment on left ventricular function in selected patients with unstable angina pectoris that was due to severe proximal left anterior descending coronary artery narrowing and to identify subgroups liable to an adverse outcome (mean term 2.7 years).  Effect of antiischemic treatment on systolic and diastolic left ventricular wall motion was studied in 35 patients who had unstable angina pectoris and an electrocardiogram that indicated severe proximal left anterior descending coronary artery narrowing.  Treatment consisted of either a revascularization procedure (17 patients) or antianginal drug therapy (18 patients).  All patients underwent a two-dimensional echocardiographic study within 48 hours (mean 20 hours) of entry into the study.  This study semiquantitatively analyzed systolic performance of the ischemia-related segments by calculation of a total wall motion score.  In 16 patients this investigation was combined with a continuous detailed recording of only the apical interventricular septal wall motion.  This detailed study included measurements for regional function by providing a typification of the pattern of systolic and early diastolic excursion of the endocardial border of the apical interventricular septum.  A repeat ultrasonic study was performed at least 1 month (median 2 months, 7 days) after admission.  Results of the systolic wall motion analyses of all 35 patients showed, in both treatment groups, a significant improvement in systolic wall motion of the anterior and apical segments (mean total wall motion score at early study vs late study: revascularization, 6.9 vs 2.2 and medical therapy, 4.6 vs 1.0).
Identification of the rate-dependent functional refractory period of the atrioventricular node in simulated atrial fibrillation.  We continuously observed successive pairs of R-R intervals during atrial fibrillation and hypothesized that the shortest R-R interval for a given preceding R-R interval in a pair represents the functional refractory period of the atrioventricular node at that preceding interval.  To test this hypothesis we simulated atrial fibrillation in 28 isolated cross-perfused canine hearts and obtained an R-R interval scatterplot by plotting the R-R intervals as a function of the immediately preceding R-R interval.  This scatterplot enabled us to detect a series of the shortest R-R intervals for a wide range of preceding R-R intervals, and this allowed us to estimate the rate-dependent functional refractory period of the atrioventricular node in simulated atrial fibrillation.  The estimated functional refractory periods correlated well with those measured by the conventional method (r = 0.93).  We conclude that the proposed method makes it possible to estimate the rate-dependent functional refractory periods of the atrioventricular node in atrial fibrillation.
Septal ventricular pacing in the immature canine heart: a new perspective.  Cardiac pacing initiated from epicardial or transvenous apical right ventricular electrodes causes asynchronous ventricular contraction.  This alters myocardial stress vectors and results in adverse cellular and subcellular changes in the experimental animal.  Clinically, such changes may contribute to the adverse hemodynamics reported with long-term ventricular pacing.  To determine the feasibility of direct stimulation of the ventricular specialized conduction systems and therefore the potential for maintenance of normalized depolarization patterns, 13 beagle puppies were studied.  Baseline ventricular activation and contraction patterns were obtained using intracardiac electrograms and multigated nuclear acquisition (MUGA) imaging.  Septal electrode insertion from the aortoatrial groove was accomplished by use of two-dimensional echocardiography and continuous electrocardiographic (ECG) monitoring of the surface ECG during pacemaker implantation in five puppies.  Standard right ventricular epicardial electrodes were implanted in five additional animals, with three remaining as age-matched non-paced controls.  After 4 months of observation, repeat MUGA imaging and intracardiac electrograms demonstrated nearly normal biventricular activation and contraction patterns among the septal-paced group.  Histopathologic examination illustrated normal cellular morphology in the septal-paced animals.  This study demonstrates that pacing electrode insertion into the proximal interventricular septum is feasible and results in utilization of the normal ventricular conduction pathway.  Such an approach to initiation of ventricular stimulation may attenuate the adverse effects of long-term ventricular pacing.
Noninvasive estimation of left atrial pressure in patients with congestive heart failure and mitral regurgitation by Doppler echocardiography.  A completely noninvasive method for estimating left atrial pressure in patients with congestive heart failure and mitral regurgitation has been devised with the use of continuous-wave Doppler echocardiography and brachial sphygmomanometry.  Of 46 patients studied with mitral regurgitation, 35 (76%) had jets with distinct Doppler spectral envelopes recorded.  The peak ventriculoatrial gradient was obtained by measuring peak mitral regurgitant velocity in systole and using the modified Bernoulli equation.  This gradient was then subtracted from peak brachial systolic blood pressure, an estimate of left ventricular systolic pressure, to yield left atrial pressure (left atrial pressure = systolic blood pressure - mitral regurgitant pressure gradient).  Noninvasive estimates of left atrial pressure from 35 patients were plotted against simultaneous recordings of mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure resulting in the correlation y = 0.88x + 3.3, r = 0.88, standard error of estimate = +/- 4 mm Hg (p less than 0.001).  Therefore, continuous-wave Doppler echocardiography and sphygmomanometry may be used in selected patients with congestive heart failure and mitral regurgitation for noninvasive estimation of left atrial pressure.
Myocardial imaging with Tc-99m teboroxime: technique and initial results.  This study examined the results of Tc-99m teboroxime imaging in 22 patients aged 59 +/- 9 years and compared the results with those of thallium-201.  The exercise and rest teboroxime studies were obtained within 3 hours of each other using a dose of 15 mCi/study.  Because of the very short wash-out half-life of teboroxime, imaging was begun within 1 to 2 minutes after injection.  Both SPECT and planar images were obtained; the SPECT protocol was modified by changing the number of frames, the time per frame, or the filters used for reconstruction of images.  The planar images were obtained in the supine or upright position.  Shorter acquisition time for SPECT (10 sec/frame) and the use of a Butterworth filter with a frequency cutoff of 0.3 cycle/cm and a power of 10 yielded best image quality.  There was a close agreement with thallium results in identifying an abnormal or normal perfusion pattern in 89% of vascular territories.  The scans were abnormal by both techniques in 12 patients, normal in nine patients, and discordant in only one patient.  Thus Tc-99m teboroxime myocardial imaging is feasible at rest and during exercise using either SPECT or planar imaging.  Shorter acquisition time and appropriate filtering for SPECT imaging and the upright position in planar imaging improve image quality and are convenient for the patient.
Future directions in vasodilator therapy for heart failure.  Vasodilator therapy has become a major pharmacologic approach for improving left ventricular function, and consequently, vasodilator drugs are being used increasingly in the treatment of heart failure.  Ideally, vasodilator drugs used in the long-term management of heart failure should show clearly defined pharmacodynamic effects.  These include reduced impedance to left ventricular ejection, increased venous capacitance, increased left ventricular ejection fraction and reduced heart size, absence of neurohormonal stimulation, and slowed progression of left ventricular dysfunction.  The mechanisms of action and sites of activity of the various vasodilator drugs currently available vary considerably, and none as yet has proved ideal for the treatment of heart failure or hypertension.  The complexity surrounding the multiple vasoconstrictor mechanisms involved in heart failure has led to a rationale for combined vasodilator therapy and certain combinations are discussed.  From a therapeutic standpoint, the development of drugs with multiple mechanisms of action is particularly attractive.  Flosequinan is a new vasodilator agent whose cellular mechanism of action remains uncertain.  Flosequinan has the advantage of being able to relax both arterial and venous beds and as such may be particularly beneficial in the treatment of heart failure.
Clinical efficacy of flosequinan in heart failure.  The effects of the new arterial and venous vasodilator flosequinan have been evaluated in a variety of ways in different groups of patients with chronic heart failure.  Flosequinan improved the central hemodynamic effects of heart failure in one group, with benefits still apparent up to 24 hours after a single oral dose.  In another group it also improved calf blood flow and, therefore, blood flow to skeletal muscle.  Also, using a number of different tests, it improved the exercise performance of the patients.  In a further group the improvement in exercise tolerance produced was similar to that of captopril.  Flosequinan has the necessary properties of a drug that is likely to be of benefit in the treatment of patients with chronic heart failure.
Early beneficial effect of streptokinase on left ventricular function in acute myocardial infarction.  The effect of intravenous streptokinase therapy on the time course of functional recovery was investigated in a controlled study of 64 patients randomized within 3 hours after the onset of acute myocardial infarction (AMI).  Contrast ventriculography was performed 1 to 4 days after AMI and repeated 5 weeks later.  Wall motion was analyzed by the centerline method in the central infarct, peripheral infarct and noninfarct regions.  In patients with ventriculographic data at the early catheterization, streptokinase-treated patients had less severe hypokinesia in the central infarct region than control patients (-2.9 +/- 0.9 [n = 29] vs -3.4 +/- 0.7 standard deviations below normal [n = 21], p less than 0.05).  The benefit of streptokinase was more marked in the peripheral infarct region (-1.5 +/- 0.7 vs -2.1 +/- 0.6, p less than 0.001).  As a result, the ejection fraction was slightly higher in treated versus control groups (46 +/- 10 vs 43 +/- 7%, respectively; difference not significant).  At 5 weeks, function in the streptokinase and control groups had diverged further because of continued improvement in the streptokinase-treated patients.  This study shows that streptokinase benefits left ventricular (LV) function by 1 to 4 days after AMI, earlier than previously reported.  The benefit was not limited to the peripheral infarct region, where ischemia might have been less severe, but was also seen in the central infarct region.  The implication is that thrombolytic therapy can improve LV function during the period of myocardial stunning, while myocardial function is still recovering.
Effects of nisoldipine on myocardial ischemia during exercise and during daily activity.  The antiischemic properties of nisoldipine, a dihydropyridine calcium antagonist, were assessed in a multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial by repeated exercise testing and 72-hour ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring in 82 patients with coronary artery disease.  Patients with positive treadmill stress test results and greater than or equal to 2 ischemic episodes per 24 hours were included in this study.  Administration of all chronic antiischemic medications except beta blockers were discontinued.  During the first week all patients received placebo twice daily.  During the second and third weeks, 41 patients received nisoldipine 10 mg and 41 patients received placebo twice daily.  In the placebo group there were no changes in exercise parameters or in ambulatory electrocardiographic parameters.  In the nisoldipine group, exercise duration increased from 403 to 448 seconds (p = 0.0035), time to 1 mm of ST depression increased from 224 to 298 seconds (p = 0.002), time to pain increased from 241 to 321 seconds (p = 0.01), and maximal ST depression was reduced from 2.6 to 2.3 mm (p = 0.002).  Among the ambulatory electrocardiographic parameters in the nisoldipine group, only the number of episodes was reduced, from 14.4 to 11.6 (p = 0.0013) per patient.  There was no significant reduction in total ischemic time (132 vs 120 minutes per patient).  No significant side effects were observed.  This is the largest clinical trial to date on the effects of nisoldipine on myocardial ischemia.  The results indicate that nisoldipine was effective in improving all exercise parameters and only partially effective in suppressing ischemia during daily activity.
Usefulness of blood lactate as a predictor of shock development in acute myocardial infarction [published erratum appears in Am J Cardiol 1991 Apr 15;67(9):912]  Data were obtained and analyzed in 229 patients admitted to the coronary care unit from November 1988 through July 1989.  The patients were classified into 2 groups: patients without or with only mild left ventricular failure (Killip class I or II) during their hospital stay (group I), and patients who were in Killip class I or II on admission but developed cardiogenic shock during hospitalization (group II).  Discriminant function analysis was performed using the following variables: patients' age, history of previous myocardial infarction, diabetes mellitus, blood lactate, urea, creatinine, creatine kinase, aspartate aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase concentrations, and chest x-ray cardiothoracic ratio.  Variables that were found to significantly discriminate the 2 groups of patients were age, previous infarction, x-ray cardiothoracic ratio, blood urea and lactate concentrations.  The risk index was computed, and blood lactate was the variable with the greatest predictive power for shock development.  The sensitivity, specificity and predictive value of the risk index, taking various cutoff points, were calculated.  With a cutoff value of 1, sensitivity was 65%, specificity 91%, positive predictive value 36% and negative predictive value 97%.  With a cutoff value of 2, sensitivity was 53%, specificity 99%, positive predictive value 82% and negative predictive value 96%.
Capabilities of supine exercise electrocardiography versus exercise radionuclide angiography in predicting coronary events.  The ability of supine exercise electrocardiography and exercise radionuclide angiography to predict time to subsequent cardiac events (cardiac death, nonfatal myocardial infarction or late coronary bypass grafting or angioplasty) were compared in 265 patients with normal resting electrocardiograms who were not taking digoxin.  All patients had undergone coronary catheterization and were initially treated medically.  Follow-up study was performed at a median of 51 months.  Separate logistic regression models, which had been previously developed to predict 3-vessel or left main coronary artery disease (CAD), were compared using a Cox regression analysis to predict time to a subsequent cardiac event.  The exercise electrocardiography model, consisting of the magnitude of ST depression, exercise heart rate and patient gender, was a powerful predictor (chi-square = 30.8, p less than 0.0001) of subsequent events.  The exercise radionuclide angiography model, which included the exercise response of the pressure-volume ratio in addition to the exercise electrocardiography variables, had similar prognostic power (chi-square = 31.8, p less than 0.0001).  In a separate analysis considering only cardiac death and nonfatal myocardial infarction, the exercise electrocardiography model remained a significant predictor of events (chi-square = 12.2, p less than 0.001).  None of the radionuclide angiography variables added significantly to the prognostic power of the exercise electrocardiography model.  Thus, in patients with a normal resting electrocardiogram who are not taking digoxin, the supine exercise electrocardiography model that predicts 3-vessel or left main CAD also predicts future cardiac events.  Exercise radionuclide angiography does not provide any additional prognostic information in such patients.
Relation of cardiac output at rest and during exercise to age in essential hypertension.  It has been suggested that the decline of cardiac output with age is due to increased prevalence of disease, particularly occult coronary artery disease.  Therefore, the relation of cardiac output (direct oxygen Fick method) to age was analyzed in 110 sixteen- to 64-year-old men with World Health Organization stage I or II essential hypertension at the time of the hemodynamic study, who were alive and free of cardiovascular complications 7 years later.  At supine and seated rest, during upright bicycle exercise at 50 W and and at peak work load, cardiac output was inversely (p less than 0.01) related to age.  These relations were independent of weight and mean intraarterial pressure.  Stroke volume decreased with advancing age at supine rest, but not at rest and during exercise in the seated position.  Heart rate was not affected by age in the supine position, but was slower in older patients during upright rest and at peak exercise.  In conclusion, in patients with essential hypertension who remained free of cardiovascular complications for 7 years, cardiac output was independently and inversely related to age at various levels of activity.  These findings suggest that occult cardiovascular disease does not explain the decline in cardiac output with age in patients with essential hypertension.
Comparison of the effects of guanadrel sulfate and propranolol on blood pressure, functional capacity, serum lipoproteins and glucose in systemic hypertension.  In a controlled, double-blind, crossover study, the effects of guanadrel sulfate and propranolol on blood pressure (BP) and selected cardiopulmonary and metabolic variables were compared in 15 physically active and moderately hypertensive subjects.  Guanadrel sulfate reduced systolic and diastolic BP at rest by -16 and -15 mm Hg, and at maximal exercise by -33 and -13 mm Hg, respectively (p less than 0.005), without affecting submaximal oxygen consumption (VO2), maximal VO2, ventilatory threshold, forced vital capacity, forced expiratory volume in 1 second, or fatigue, as assessed by perceived exertion.  In contrast, propranolol significantly decreased diastolic BP at rest (-16 mm Hg) and systolic BP at maximal exercise (-44 mm Hg); however, it significantly decreased submaximal VO2 (-3.9 ml.kg-1.min-1), maximal VO2 (-3.9 ml.kg-1.min-1), ventilatory threshold (-0.3 liters.min-1), minute ventilation at submaximal exercise (-7.3 liters.min-1), forced expiratory volume in 1 second (-0.27 liters), and concomitantly increased the rating of perceived exertion at maximal exercise (1.9 U).  Guanadrel sulfate was also associated with significant decreases in mean fasting plasma glucose and total serum cholesterol, whereas propranolol resulted in an increase in serum triglycerides (p less than 0.05).  In contrast to propranolol, guanadrel sulfate appears to decrease BP without evoking negative metabolic consequences or impairing exercise tolerance.
Abnormal baroreflex control of heart rate in decompensated congestive heart failure and reversal after compensation.  Congestive heart failure (CHF) causes impairment of baroreflex control of heart rate (HR).  To determine if this derangement is reversible, the cardiac chronotropic control was assessed in 10 patients with class IV chronic CHF of various etiologies before and after compensation achieved by bed rest, salt restriction, diuretics and vasodilators.  Mean time between the 2 studies was 15 +/- 3 days.  The management was modified 3 days before the second autonomic evaluation, so as to reestablish the same diet and pharmacologic conditions of the previous study.  Compensation led to significant reduction in symptom-based class, body weight, and pulmonary and systemic congestion.  Mean +/- standard error of the mean HR responses (beats/min) before and after compensation were, respectively: (1) to atropine (0.04 mg/kg): 10 +/- 2 and 27 +/- 2 (p less than 0.01); (2) to handgrip (30% maximum capacity, 1 minute): 9 +/- 2 and 19 +/- 3 (p less than 0.005); (3) to headup tilt (5 minutes): 4 +/- 3 and 20 +/- 4 (p less than 0.005).  Mean +/- standard error of the mean baroreflex sensitivity (ms/mm Hg) of RR responses to phenylephrine and amyl nitrate-induced changes in systolic pressure was, respectively, in each condition: phenylephrine, 0.9 +/- 0.2 and 8 +/- 2.3 (p less than 0.05); amyl nitrate, 0.3 +/- 0.2 and 4.1 +/- 1.1 (p less than 0.05).  A significant correlation between improvement in HR responses to atropine and tilt and changes in body weight was obtained.  These findings show a reversible component of impaired baroreflex control of HR in severe CHF, possibly due to its congestive effects.
Doppler echocardiographic study of porcine bioprosthetic heart valves in the aortic valve position in patients without evidence of cardiac dysfunction.  To study the natural history of the hemodynamic performance of bioprosthetic heart valves, Doppler echocardiograms were recorded in a group of clinically stable patients at 2 and 5 years after replacement of native aortic valves with bioprosthetic valves.  Eighteen patients completed a 2-year and 26 patients a 5-year follow-up examination.  The effective orifice areas of identical models of bioprosthetic valves (Hancock II) were determined in vitro in a left-sided heart pulse duplicator system.  In vivo Doppler-derived effective orifice areas were compared with the in vitro measurements for the same valve size.  At both the 2- and 5-year follow-up examinations, the Doppler-derived effective orifice area was significantly less than the in vitro area (p less than 0.0001 at each interval).  Ten of 16 valves evaluated serially decreased greater than 0.20 cm2 in the Doppler-derived effective orifice area between studies.  The mean decrease in effective orifice area in valves evaluated serially was 0.25 +/- 0.29 cm2 (p less than 0.005).  The peak transaortic gradient increased from 21 +/- 6 to 27 +/- 8 mm Hg (p less than 0.01).  The mean transaortic gradient increased from 12 +/- 4 to 15 +/- 7 mm Hg (p less than 0.05).  It is concluded that serial Doppler echocardiographic studies demonstrate a deterioration in the hemodynamic performance of bioprosthetic valves over time in patients with no symptoms or signs of valvular dysfunction and that Doppler echocardiography may be useful for identifying subclinical bioprosthetic valvular dysfunction.
Effects of the phospholipase inhibitor mepacrine on injury in ischemic and metabolically inhibited adult isolated myocytes.  The phospholipase inhibitor mepacrine has been shown to delay cell death of metabolically inhibited cultured cardiomyocytes.  The present study was initiated to determine if mepacrine also delays cell death and development of osmotic fragility of both metabolically inhibited and ischemic adult rat cardiomyocytes.  Isolated myocyte suspensions were incubated with 3 mmol/l (millimolar) iodoacetic acid and 6 mmol/l amytal (inhibited) or were pelleted into a slurry and layered with oil (ischemic) in the presence and absence of 10 or 50 mumol/l (micromolar) mepacrine.  Rates of contracture, cell viability as determined by trypan blue permeability, cell viability after osmotic swelling in 170 mOsm media (osmotic fragility), and cell morphology were monitored.  Mepacrine had no effects on rates of contracture, but was found to significantly delay cell death during isotonic incubations of both metabolically inhibited and ischemic cells.  In contrast, mepacrine had no effect on the development of osmotic fragility.  Incubation of metabolically inhibited myocytes in calcium-free media did not delay contracture or cell injury, but did attenuate the protective effects of mepacrine.  This study confirms previous reports that mepacrine protects cells from injury, extends the observations of protection to ischemic isolated adult myocytes, but shows that development of osmotic fragility is not inhibited by mepacrine.
Cisplatin-fluorouracil interaction in a squamous cell carcinoma xenograft.  Patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck are treated with cisplatin and fluorouracil according to a schedule based on the findings of clinical studies.  A similar schedule showed a supra-additive effect in the treatment of xenografted human squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.  We sought to ascertain whether this schedule was optimal.  A single intraperitoneal injection of cisplatin (7.5 mg/kg) was combined with three injections of fluorouracil given during a 24-hour period (total dose, 150 or 80 mg/kg) before, during, or after cisplatin administration.  The combined effect of cisplatin and fluorouracil on tumor growth and toxic effects was schedule dependent.  Consideration of both toxic effects and tumor growth inhibition, as assessed by reduction of the area under the growth curve, the optimal administration interval was found to be fluorouracil given 3 days after cisplatin administration.
HLA class I and class II antigen expression on squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.  We compared human major histocompatibility (HLA) class I and class II antigen expression on squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck with that on normal mucosa.  Frozen sections of a consecutive series of 30 squamous cell carcinomas were stained with the monoclonal antibodies W6/32 (class I) and anti-DR (class II) using an immunoperoxidase technique.  Normal mucosa showed class I and class II expression in the basal layers only.  Class I expression on tumors was diffuse in 87%, patchy in 10%, and scattered in 3%.  Class II expression on tumors was diffuse in 20%, patchy in 53%, scattered in 20%, and absent in 7%.  Patterns of expression did not correlate significantly with clinical parameters, including survival, except that class II diffuse and patchy patterns were found to correlate with more poorly differentiated tumors.
Computed tomography of metastatic cervical lymph nodes. A clinical, computed tomographic, pathologic correlative study.  A retrospective comparative study of 63 neck dissections was undertaken to evaluate further the accuracy of high-resolution computed tomography (CT) in the detection of nodal metastases, as previous studies have indicated a trend toward the superiority of CT scanning over palpation.  The respective values of neck examination, CT scanning, and histopathologic examination were assessed in 51 patients with head and neck cancer who underwent a total of 63 neck dissections.  The overall agreement between clinical examination findings and histopathologic findings was 92% vs 81% for CT scanning.  A retrospective analysis of the CT findings failed to reveal greater accuracy.  We found nodes measuring 10 mm or more with central low density always to be malignant.  Because CT scanning seems to offer little advantage over palpation in the nonirradiated neck, it should not be regarded as an essential tool in the staging of nodal disease.  After radiation therapy, as neck dissection is only performed because of clinical or radiologic suspicion, CT scanning is of utmost importance.
Invasive migration of epidemic Kaposi's sarcoma cells in vitro.  Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) is a low grade malignant neoplasm which shows invasive growth and often occurs in immunosuppressed patients with the Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS; epidemic KS).  It is also found in elderly men where it is usually limited to the skin (classic KS).  The present study investigated the chemotaxis and invasive migration of epidemic KS cells in vitro and compared them to cells grown from classic KS lesions and to fibroblasts.  Epidemic KS cells demonstrated invasive migration through reconstituted basement membrane (Matrigel) as well as through interstitial connective tissue (collagen I) in early passages, whereas fibroblasts did not invade either barrier.  Epidemic KS cells in late passages did not show any invasive migration.  Following pretreatment with tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) there was no enhanced migration through the Matrigel and collagen I for epidemic KS cells, whereas classic KS cells showed an increased migration through the type I collagen barrier.
Distinct characteristics of lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells derived from patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL). A factor in B-CLL serum promotes natural killer cell-like LAK cell growth.  We show that lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cell precursors derived from patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) and cultured in the presence of recombinant interleukin-2 and normal human serum (NHS), develop into primarily NK cell-like (CD 57+) LAK cells, whereas identically prepared LAK cell precursors from normal subjects develop into mainly T cell-like (CD 3+, CD 8+) LAK cells.  B-CLL LAK cells exhibited greater proliferative capacity than did normal LAK cells.  When normal LAK cells were grown in B-CLL serum instead of NHS, their proliferation increased; NK cell levels also increased to those found in B-CLL LAK cells, suggesting that B-CLL serum contains a factor that promotes NK cell-like growth, LAK cells derived from normal or B-CLL patients demonstrated similar lytic activity toward K562 and Raji cells.  Growth in B-CLL serum did not reduce their lytic potential.  Thus, the altered phenotype and growth exhibited by B-CLL LAK cells and normal LAK cells grown in B-CLL serum does not lead to abnormalities in their cytolytic functions.  We propose instead that the predominance of NK-like cells in B-CLL LAK cell populations and the presence of an NK cell-like growth factor in B-CLL serum reflect abnormalities related to NK cell-mediated B-cell regulation; ie, either inhibition of normal B-cell growth and/or growth stimulation of the leukemic clone in B-CLL.
Genotypic characterization of centrocytic lymphoma: frequent rearrangement of the chromosome 11 bcl-1 locus.  Centrocytic lymphomas are defined in the Kiel classification as B-cell lymphomas composed exclusively of cells resembling cleaved follicular center cells (FCC).  These lymphomas have been shown to be histologically, immunophenotypically, and clinically distinct from other cleaved FCC lymphomas.  DNA from 18 centrocytic lymphomas (14 patients) was analyzed using Southern blotting and probes for immunoglobulin heavy (JH) and kappa light chain (JK) joining gene, T-cell receptor beta chain constant gene (CB), bcl-1, bcl-2, and c-myc gene rearrangements.  All of the lymphomas had JH and JK rearrangements, confirming their B-cell origin.  None of the specimens had detectable CB, bcl-2, or c-myc rearrangements.  However, 4 of 14 patients (28.6%) had rearrangement of the chromosome 11 bcl-1 locus.  Therefore, centrocytic lymphomas are genotypically distinguishable from the majority of other small cleaved FCC lymphomas by their lack of demonstrable bcl-2 rearrangements.  This supports the distinct nature of centrocytic lymphomas and suggests the lack of importance for the putative oncogene bcl-2 in these cases.  Furthermore, the frequent rearrangement of bcl-1 suggests a possible role for this locus in the pathogenesis of at least some centrocytic lymphomas.
The pharmacokinetics of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 in the rabbit.  The pharmacokinetics of the activated and latent forms of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) isolated from HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells (HT1080 PAI-1) and a nonglycosylated form of human PAI-1 isolated from a yeast expression system (rPAI-1) were followed in the rabbit.  As assessed by an immunologic assay specific for human PAI-1, guanidine HCI activated HT1080 PAI-1 and rPAI-1 entered the total plasma volume following intravenous bolus administration and exhibited a biphasic clearance pattern.  The t1/2s of HT1080 PAI-1 for the initial and beta phases equalled 6.0 and 24.8 minutes, respectively.  The t1/2s of rPAI-1 for the initial and beta phases equalled 8.8 and 34.0 minutes, respectively.  Similar results were obtained by measuring PAI-1 activity in plasma and with trace amounts of 125I-rPAI-1, suggesting that the above pharmacokinetic behavior could also apply to endogenous PAI-1.  The liver was the main site of rPAI-1 clearance.  Unactivated, latent PAI-1 exhibited a very different pharmacokinetic profile.  Over 80% of latent rPAI-1 cleared from the circulation within 10 minutes (t1/2 = 1.7 minutes).  The difference in clearance behavior between activated and latent PAI-1 may be related to the ability of activated PAI-1, but not latent PAI-1, to rapidly form high-molecular-weight complexes with plasma binding factors which were observed in vitro and in vivo.  Because PAI-1 could potentially tilt the fibrinolytic balance toward a prothrombotic state, its rapid clearance may represent an important control mechanism governing the circulating levels of this key component of the fibrinolytic pathway.
Cancer mortality in a higher-income black population in New York State. Comparison with rates in the United States as a whole.  In the 1980 Census the median family income among blacks in Suffolk County, New York (i.e., $19,604) was much higher than that for American blacks as a whole (i.e., $12,618) and 94.1% of that for American whites (i.e., $20,840), but the proportion below the poverty level was still higher for Suffolk County blacks than for American whites.  Observed numbers of deaths from 1979 to 1985 for total cancers and most cancer sites in Suffolk County black men and women were not lower than expected on the basis of age-specific and gender-specific death rates for blacks in the US.  Although numbers of deaths from cervical cancer and prostate cancer were slightly lower than expected in Suffolk County blacks versus American blacks, these numbers were still significantly greater than expected on the basis of death rates among American whites.  Age-specific death rates for age groups 25 to 44 years to 55 to 64 years tended to be lower in Suffolk County for lung cancers in black men but not for breast cancer in black women.  Specific cancer sites, which differ in the direction of the association between incidence and socioeconomic status, age, and gender must be considered in comparisons of cancer mortality by race and socioeconomic level.  Implications of the comparisons were discussed with regard to the goal of reducing racial differences in cancer death rates.
Immunocytochemical estrogen and progestin receptor assays in breast cancer with monoclonal antibodies. Histopathologic, demographic, and biochemical correlations and relationship to endocrine response and survival.  Breast cancer specimens from 600 women were assayed for estrogen receptors (ER) using an immunocytochemical assay (ICA) employing the monoclonal antiestrophilin antibody H222 Sp gamma.  Results showed significant correlation with biochemical ER determinations as well as with tumor grade and menopausal status.  In 449 cases, results of progesterone receptor assay by ICA using the monoclonal anti-PgR antibody KD 68, also correlated significantly with biochemical PgR measurements.  The ERICA/PgRICA positivity was significantly more frequent in postmenopausal white women.  Colloid carcinomas were most likely to be ERICA positive and PgRICA positive whereas medullary carcinomas were most often negative.  In 47 patients with advanced mammary carcinoma, results of ERICA and PgRICA were more closely related to endocrine response than those of ER and PgR by dextran-coated charcoal assay (DCC).  In 339 women with Stage I or Stage II breast cancer, ERICA was significantly associated with disease-free survival.  Analysis by Cox's proportional hazard model, however, showed PgRICA to be the best predictor of survival and disease-free survival in 197 women at the same stages of disease.  These data indicate that ICA is more predictive of prognosis than biochemical ER and PgR.  The ease of ICA performance coupled with these results indicate that the method is an acceptable substitute for DCC in analyzing breast cancers for ER/PgR.
Teniposide (VM-26) and continuous infusion cytosine arabinoside for initial induction failure in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. A Pediatric Oncology Group pilot study.  Twenty-six evaluable children with newly diagnosed acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) who failed to achieve initial remission after receiving two to seven drugs for at least a 4-week period were given teniposide (VM-26) and continuous infusion cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C).  Twenty-two received 150 mg/m2 of VM-26 on days 1 and 2 with 100 mg/2 of Ara-C as a continuous infusion on days 1 through 5; a second shortened course was given on day 14 to eight patients who had evidence of some antileukemic effect or were clinically judged able to tolerate a second course.  The last four patients received three daily doses of VM-26 and a 7-day infusion of Ara-C at the same daily dosages.  Twelve (48%) achieved complete remission (CR) of ALL.  There was a trend toward decreasing response rates with an increasing number of drugs used in the initial induction regimen, i.e., five CR among seven patients with a prior two-drug induction attempt, six CR among 14 patients with a prior three- to four-drug induction attempt, and one CR among four patients with a prior five- to seven-drug induction attempt (P = 0.14).  Ten of 17 non-T-cell patients and two of nine T-cell patients achieved remission (P = 0.10).  The median time required to achieve a complete remission from the initiation of treatment was 26 days (range, 14-72 days).  This period was shorter in those who required one course compared with those who required two induction courses, i.e., 25 days median vs.  44 days median.  Toxicity was significant and due mainly to marrow aplasia and infection; one patient had severe prolonged VM-26-induced hypotension.  Of the 12 patients entering remission, two were removed for marrow transplant and one was removed due to parental request.  In the remaining nine patients, median remission duration was only 2 months (range, 1-18 months).  All nine patients relapsed in the marrow.  Among the entire group of 26 patients, only one patient is alive and a long-term event-free survivor (after allogeneic marrow transplant).  Due to the current use of more aggressive initial induction regimens and the extremely poor prognosis in children who fail to achieve initial remission, more intensive regimens of continuation therapy or alternative therapies, such as bone marrow transplant, should be considered.
Association of disease-free survival and percent of ideal dose in adjuvant breast chemotherapy.  The relationship between percent of ideal dose and disease-free survival was examined in 256 Stage II and III patients who participated in a 2-year breast adjuvant chemotherapy trial consisting of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil (CMF) given postoperatively.  When analyzed analogously to previous work, the results confirmed a dose-response relationship: that is, there appeared to be an improved disease-free survival for patients receiving higher doses of adjuvant chemotherapy.  The major criticism of such an analysis is its bias.  This bias was addressed by considering only patients who were still receiving therapy at 6, 12, and 24 months; then, the dose-response relationship was no longer seen.  Although causality cannot be inferred, the apparent differences in disease-free survival among the dose groups can be attributed to recurrences in the first 2 years among patients receiving lower doses of chemotherapy.
Doxorubicin for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. A prospective study on the addition of verapamil.  A prospective study was conducted to assess the safety and efficacy of the addition of oral verapamil to intravenous Adriamycin (doxorubicin) for the management of patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).  All 28 patients studied had histologically verified disease, and cirrhosis was present in 20 of the 21 patients with adequate tissue sampling.  The overall median survival was 57 days.  Chemotherapy was terminated in seven patients after one course of treatment.  Partial response and complete response were noted in four patients (19%) and one patient (4.8%), respectively, among the 21 patients evaluated.  Side effects related to the chemotherapy were present in all patients studied.  Death from fulminating sepsis occurred in three of the 13 patients with leukopenia.  Symptomatic myocardial dysfunction developed in one patient.  The addition of verapamil apparently did not potentiate the tumoricidal effect of systemic Adriamycin on HCC but probably did increase its complications.
A phase I trial of cisplatin in hypertonic saline and escalating doses of 5-fluorouracil by continuous intravenous infusion in patients with advanced malignancies.  Thirty-four patients with incurable solid tumors were treated in a Phase I trial with a fixed dose of high-dose cisplatin (CDDP) administered in hypertonic saline and escalating doses of infusional 5-fluorouracil (5-FU).  Five treatment levels of 5-FU, ranging from 500 to 900 mg/m2/day for 5 days, were studied.  Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and oral mucositis were the dose-limiting toxicities encountered.  Nephrotoxicity was minimal.  Ototoxicity and peripheral neuropathies were rare and mild in this patient group, but most patients received only a small number of treatment cycles.  Diarrhea was not dose-limiting.  Two complete responses (one non-small cell lung cancer and one sweat gland carcinoma) were observed.  No other major responses were noted.  With the dose of CDDP set at 35 mg/m2/day for 5 consecutive days, the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of a concurrent 5-day 5-FU infusion was found to be 900 mg/m2/day.  The recommended dosages for Phase II trials are 35 mg/m2/day CDDP and 800 mg/m2/day 5-FU for 5 consecutive days.  Cancers of the lung, breast, gastrointestinal tract, and genitourinary tract would be reasonable targets for Phase II studies.
Treatment of advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the skin with cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil, and bleomycin.  The authors treated 14 patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the skin or lip with one to four cycles of combination chemotherapy consisting of cisplatin by bolus injection, and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and bleomycin by continuous 5-day infusion.  Objective responses were seen in 11 of the 13 evaluable patients (84%).  Four patients had a complete remission (30%) and seven patients, a partial remission (54%).  Local control after definitive complementary radiation and/or surgical treatment was achieved in seven patients.  Toxic side effects was acceptable; they consisted of nausea and vomiting in all patients, transient skin changes, hematologic (Grade 3/4) abnormalities in four patients, and pulmonary fibrosis in one elderly patient.  These results show that this chemotherapy combination could play a role in reducing the tumor mass and in facilitating definitive treatment to obtain better functional and cosmetic results in advanced SCC of the skin.
Effect of intraarterial versus intravenous cisplatin in addition to systemic doxorubicin, high-dose methotrexate, and ifosfamide on histologic tumor response in osteosarcoma (study COSS-86).  In osteosarcoma, intraarterial (IA) administration of systemic treatment has been advocated to improve local tumor response preparing for, or even obviating, definitive surgery.  Because data from the literature did not unequivocally support the local superiority of IA infusion, a comparative study was started in 1986.  Preoperative chemotherapy consisted of 45 mg/m2 of doxorubicin on days 1 and 2; 12 g/m2 of high-dose methotrexate on days 15 and 22; and 3 g/m2 of ifosfamide on days 29, 30, 50, and 51 followed on days 31 and 52 by intravenous (IV) versus IA tourniquet infusion of cisplatin (DDP).  A strict randomization of patients was not feasible.  A balanced distribution of risk factors was strived for by stratifying and allocating the appropriate patients centrally.  The infusion time was prolonged from 1 to 5 hours in the IV group, and the DDP dose was reduced from 150 to 120 mg/m2 in both arms when intolerable ototoxicity became apparent.  A multivariate analysis was performed to exclude a bias on the response rates from risk factor distribution and from modifications of DDP infusion time and dosage.  The overall fraction of histologic good responders (greater than 90% necrosis) was not found to be different after IA versus IV treatment (34/50 [68%] vs.  41/59 [69%]).  Intraarterial instead of IV use of DDP within an aggressive systemic treatment does not seem to improve the local tumor response.
Long-term follow-up of 24 patients undergoing radical resection for ampullary carcinoma, 1953 to 1988.  Potentially curative radical pancreaticoduodenectomy for ampullary adenocarcinoma was performed in 24 patients over a 35-year period.  The overall operative mortality was 12.5%.  Actuarial survival rate at 5 years was 61% +/- 13.4 standard error of the mean (SEM) and subsequently remained unchanged.  In the same time period, 21 patients underwent potentially curative radical pancreaticoduodenectomy for periampullary tumors of pancreatic origin.  Similar analysis showed an overall operative mortality of 23.8% and a survival rate at 5 years of 27% +/- 12.5 SEM.  The results of radical pancreaticoduodenectomy for ampullary carcinoma in the most recent years (1976 to 1988) were compared with those of former years (1953 to 1975).  There were no statistically significant differences in the 5-year survival rate; however, the operative mortality decreased from 25% in the former period to 6.3% in the recent period.  Survival was dependent on nodal status.  The 5-year survival rate was 78% +/- 11.5 SEM in the absence of nodal metastasis versus 50% +/- 25 SEM in the presence of regional nodal metastasis.  These findings support the concept that radical pancreaticoduodenectomy offers a realistic probability for cure in a selected group of patients with carcinomas of the ampulla of Vater.
Expression of Ki-1 antigen (CD30) in mesenchymal tumors.  Expression of CD30(Ki-1) antigen has long been considered to be restricted to activated lymphocytes and related tumors.  However, expression of this antigen has also been detected in embryonal carcinomas, in nonembryonal carcinomas, in malignant melanomas, and even in some myeloid cell lines and macrophages at late stages of differentiation.  In this study, using monoclonal antibody Ki-1, expression of CD30 antigen was immunohistochemically examined in frozen sections of 28 benign and 63 malignant mesenchymal tumors.  The authors found CD30 expressed in two of four leiomyomas, seven of 11 leiomysarcomas, one of six rhabdomyosarcomas, two of two aggressive fibromatoses, one of three fibrosarcomas, two of four synovial sarcomas, one giant cell tumors of tendon sheaths, all five malignant fibrous histiocytomas, all three osteosarcomas, one of three Ewing's sarcomas, in a tumor cell subpopulation of two of ten malignant schwannomas, and in the Schwann cell compartment of one of two ganglioneuromas tested.  Furthermore, CD30 was consistently expressed in the myoepithelial compartment of 13 fibroadenomas.  However, all five lipomas, all seven liposarcomas, all three neuroblastomas, both ganglioneuroblastomas, both chondrosarcomas, and tumors of disputed origin tested were consistently CD30 negative.  These findings indicate that, outside the lymphatic system, CD30 antigen is not restricted to epithelial neoplasms but may also be present in tumors of mesenchymal origin.  The authors conclude that CD30 antigen, although having limited utility in the differential diagnosis of tumors of questionable histogenesis, may eventually define relevant subgroups within the main tumor categories.
Immunophenotypes in "classical" B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Correlation with normal cellular counterpart and clinical findings.  This study evaluates the expression of a series of membrane antigens, normally expressed by B-lymphocytes of the lymphocytic mantle and marginal zone, in 90 selected cases of "classical" (mouse red blood cell-receptor+, CD20+, CD5+, surface immunoglobulin +/-) B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) with the aim of contributing toward identifying the normal counterpart of B-CLL and any correlations between surface antigen pattern and certain clinical characteristics.  Clustered (CD23, 25, 39, 40, 27, 1c, w75) and unclustered (NuB1, 7F7, KiB3) monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) were tested.  Almost all cases showed high reactivity to CD23, 27, w75, 39, 40, and NuB1: expression of CD1c was very low and that of 7F7, KiB3, and CD25 was variable.  The reactivity of 7F7 and KiB3 was strictly correlated, and they correlated individually with CD25.  Results show that the most frequent B-CLL phenotype (CD19+, 5+, 23+, 27+, 39+, NuB1+, KiB3 +/-, 7F7 +/-, and CD25 +/-) corresponds to one or more cellular subsets in the mantle zone.  No correlation was found between MoAb expression, surface immunoglobulin (SIg) class or type, clinical stage, disease activity, or age at diagnosis.  The only difference (statistically borderline) was the expression of 7F7 and KiB3 (in young versus old patients).  This suggests that modulations in the expression of surface antigens do not affect the clinical behavior of the disease.
Prognostic implication of ecto-5'-nucleotidase activity in acute lymphoblastic leukemia.  Ecto-5'-nucleotidase (5'-N) activity was determined in 191 patients (71 children and 120 adults) with acute leukemia.  Elevated values for 5'-N were registered in common acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), but blast cells of T-cell ALL (T-ALL) and common ALL antigen-negative non-T-ALL had low enzyme activity comparable with the values of acute non-lymphocytic leukemia.  Dependence of remission duration on 5'-N activity was analyzed in 74 adults with ALL, treated similarly in a prospective multicenter trial.  The remission curves for ALL patients with 5'-N activity lower than 10 nmol/h x 10(6) cells were substantially and significantly better than those of patients with high activity (greater than 10 nmol/h x 10(6) cells).  This difference was also evident in the immunologic subclass common ALL.  Statistical evaluation showed that an interaction between immunologic subtype of the blast cells and their 5'-N activity had prognostic significance for remission duration.  In addition to the independent factor, initial age, this interaction was also prognostic for survival.
Lewis system alterations in gastric carcinogenesis.  Alterations in the expression of type 1 blood group-related antigens (Lewis a and b) were examined immunohistochemically in 371 consecutives gastric biopsy and 80 surgical specimens from patients of gastric carcinoma.  The ABH and Lewis phenotype and secretor status of the patients were correlated with histologic findings.  An anomalous expression of Lewis a antigen was found in 88 of 249 gastric biopsy specimens of Lewis (a-b+) phenotype patients.  The prevalence of this anomaly increased with the evolution of the premalignant process, in agreement with the commonly accepted model of gastric carcinogenesis.  Thus, anomalous Lewis a antigen appeared in 66.6% of gastric dysplasia cases, in 64.6% of intestinal metaplasia, in 15.4% of atrophic gastritis, and in 7.4% of superficial gastritis.  No alterations were found in subjects with normal gastric mucosa.  Forty-seven of the 49 Lewis (a-b+) phenotype gastric carcinoma patients showed antigenic alterations in tumor cells (anomalous Lewis a antigen in 36 and loss of Lewis antigens in 11).  In 26 of these gastric specimens an anomalous Lewis a antigen was present in areas of intestinal metaplasia and/or dysplasia away from the area of neoplastic transformation.  The expression of Lewis a antigen in Lewis (a-b+) phenotype patients is a frequent phenomenon in gastric neoplastic cells and could result from the blocked synthesis of Lewis b antigen with accumulation of its precursors.  These findings suggest that, during gastric carcinogenesis, antigenic alterations may precede neoplastic transformation.  An anomalous Lewis a antigen could constitute a significant index of severity of the histologic lesion and contribute to identifying high-risk individuals.
Comparison of DNA content in gastric cancer cells between primary lesions and lymph node metastases.  Cytophotomtric DNA contents of tumor cells in primary lesions and the corresponding metastatic lymph nodes were compared in 61 cases of gastric cancer to determine whether the DNA content remains stable during lymph node metastasis.  The DNA distribution patterns were grouped into three types, according to the proportion of aneuploid cell population.  Changes in DNA patterns between primary and metastatic lesions were evident in 36 of 61 patients (59.0%); in the remaining 25 (41.0%), the same DNA distribution patterns were noted for both lesions.  In 33 of these 36, DNA pattern in the primary carcinoma was transformed into a more narrowly scattered one in the metastatic lesion of the lymph node.  Mean and modal values and the frequency of cells over tetraploid (4c) or hexaploid (6c) were significantly higher in the primary lesion compared with findings in the metastatic lesions.  This reduction in DNA content in the metastatic lesions was a more frequent occurrence in differentiated (18 of 23) than in undifferentiated adenocarcinoma (15 of 35) (P less than 0.01).  Therefore, in primary lesions with a widely scattered DNA ploidy, the tumor cells with a smaller DNA ploidy frequently metastasized to lymph nodes, particularly in cases of a differentiated carcinoma.  Such observations may be pertinent in future designing of treatment protocols.
Mucinous adenocarcinoma of the submandibular gland.  A rare tumor not easily classifiable among published histologic categories for salivary gland tumors is reported.  The neoplasm developed within the submandibular gland of a 78-year-old woman with invasion of the mandible and metastasis to regional lymph nodes.  Histopathologically, cuboidal cells possessing clear cytoplasm and displaced round nuclei proliferated and exhibited an adenomatous pattern.  Many cystic spaces surrounded by tumor cell strands were seen, mucus substance filled in the cystic spaces, and the tumor cells seemed mucus-secreting, but neither epidermoid cells nor papillary appearance could be observed.  Electromicroscopically, numerous mucous droplets of low electron density were prominent in the cytoplasm, and the tumor cells had sparse irregular microvilli on the luminal surface.  Mucin histochemistry, including paradoxical concanavalin A staining, revealed that the tumor cells contained neutral and acid mucins, and these were identified as class II and III mucosubstances.  No other neoplastic lesion, except recurrent metastatic neck nodes, has been detected 6 years after the first examination, and it seems that the tumor is a rare primary mucinous adenocarcinoma of the submandibular gland.
The use of flow cytometry for the prognosis of stage II adjuvant treated breast cancer patients.  Characterization of breast cancer cells by histology, flow cytometry, and steroid receptors was performed on 197 Stage II breast node positive cancer patients given adjuvant chemotherapy, plus tamoxifen for patients with positive hormone receptors.  Histologic and steroid receptor assays were performed using standard techniques; flow cytometric analysis was performed from paraffin-embedded blocks obtained from the primary tumor.  Quality control studies on reproducibility, tissue heterogeneity, and analysis procedures have been included.  Of the 197 patients studied, aneuploidy was found in 102 (52%); the median %S value was 8% with a range of 0.4% to 38%.  Our results demonstrated that number of positive nodes, receptor status, and grade were of prognostic value.  Cell cycle kinetic data were not of independent prognostic value in this series.  However, ploidy could differentiate in prognosis in the receptor-negative subgroup.  Patients with receptor-negative tumors had a significantly better overall survival if the tumor was diploid in nature.  Cell kinetics was not significantly prognostic for either receptor subgroup, although patients with higher %S tended to have better relapse-free and overall survival.  This is in disagreement with other studies and may demonstrate that treatment has confounded our results and diminished the ability of flow cytometry data to help predict outcome.
Comparison of the conventional method of lymph node staging with a comprehensive fat-clearing method for gastric adenocarcinoma.  Discrepant results in long-term survival between United States and Japanese patients with resectable gastric adenocarcinoma may result from more accurate staging in the Japanese series.  The authors compared a comprehensive fat-clearing method with the conventional pathology method of lymph node sampling in 11 patients undergoing curative gastrectomy and extended lymphadenectomy at their institution.  Comprehensive fat-clearing doubled total lymph node counts (P less than 0.01), identified smaller lymph nodes (P less than 0.001), and identified more histologically involved nodes of significantly smaller size (P less than 0.001).  Comprehensive fat-clearing pathologically upstaged 29% of the authors' eligible specimens.  Accurate pathologic staging is necessary when comparing Japanese and United States survival data for resectable gastric adenocarcinomas.
Neuropeptide Y and neuron-specific enolase levels in benign and malignant pheochromocytomas.  Neuron-specific enolase (NSE) is the isoform of enolase, a glycolytic enzyme found in the neuroendocrine system.  Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a peptide recently discovered in the peripheral and central nervous systems.  Serum NSE and plasma NPY levels have been reported to be increased in some patients with pheochromocytoma.  The authors evaluated whether the measurement of these molecules could help to discriminate between benign and malignant forms of pheochromocytoma.  The NSE levels were normal in all patients with benign pheochromocytoma (n = 13) and elevated in one half of those with malignant pheochromocytoma (n = 13).  Plasma NPY levels were on the average significantly higher in the malignant (177.1 +/- 38.9 pmol/l, n = 16) than in the benign forms of the disease (15.7 +/- 389 pmol/l, n = 24).  However, there was no difference in the percentage of patients with elevated NPY levels.  These results show that determination of serum NSE may be useful for distinguishing between malignant and benign pheochromocytoma; the measurement of plasma NPY is not useful for differentiating the two kinds of tumors.
A newly established human osteosarcoma cell line with osteoblastic properties.  A human osteosarcoma cell line, HuO9, was established from a tumor that was heterotransplanted into athymic nude mice.  Antiserum against nude mouse spleen cells was added to the early passage cultures to eliminate the host fibroblastic cells.  The cell line retained a high activity of liver/bone/kidney-type alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and secreted osteocalcin, i.e., bone gamma-carboxyglutamic acid-containing protein (BGP), into the medium.  The addition of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3) increased the ALP activity as well as the level of BGP secreted into the medium.  The ALP of 1,25(OH)2D3-treated cells has the same inhibition characteristics to heat and amino acids as that of untreated cells.  Synthetic human parathyroid hormone stimulated the production of intracellular adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (cAMP) approximately 100-fold within five minutes.  However, the stimulation was not observed with a synthetic human thyrocalcitonin.  When HuO9 cells were transplanted into the back of a nude mouse, a tumor with an abundant osteoid formation and mineralization was produced.  The results indicate that the HuO9 cell line expresses well-differentiated osteoblastic phenotypes.  HuO9 is the first established human cell line to produce BGP, and it provides a useful model for the studies of osteoblasts and the regulatory mechanisms of BGP production.
Oncocytic glomus tumor of the trachea.  An oncocytic variant of glomus tumor of the trachea occurred in a 47-year-old woman.  She experienced intermittent cough and hemoptysis for about three years.  Bronchoscopy and chest CT scan showed a small reddish polypoid tumor on the lower end of the trachea.  Bronchoscopic biopsy was carefully done and was diagnosed as oncocytoma.  A wedge resection of the tumor was done.  Tumor cells were characterized by strongly eosinophilic granular cytoplasm on light microscopy and by numerous closely packed round or ovoid mitochondria with prominent tubular cristae on electron microscopy.  They were arranged in a sheet around small vessels, as a result of which the biopsy diagnosis of oncocytoma was changed to oncocytic glomus tumor.  To our knowledge, this is the first report of an oncocytic glomus tumor arising from the trachea.
Multicentric endobronchial granular cell myoblastoma.  Granular cell myoblastoma (GCM) is a rare benign neoplasm involving the tracheobronchial tree.  It is believed to arise from the Schwann cell.  Four cases of tracheobronchial GCM, all of which were multicentric, are presented and a conservative therapeutic approach is suggested.
Endosonography of pararectal lymph nodes. In vitro and in vivo evaluation.  One hundred thirteen patients with carcinoma of the rectum were evaluated for lymph node metastases by endorectal ultrasound.  With the use of 7.5 MHz and based on different echo patterns, two main groups of lymph nodes can be differentiated: hypoechoic and hyperechoic lymph nodes.  Compared with pathologic findings, hypoechoic lymph nodes represent metastases, whereas hyperechoic lymph nodes are visualized due to unspecific inflammation.  Lymph node metastases can be predicted with a sensitivity of 72 percent and inflammatory lymph nodes with a specificity of 83 percent.  The physical basis of the differentiation of lymph nodes was assessed in vitro by the determination of ultrasound parameters (speed of sound, acoustic impedance, attenuation, and backscattered amplitude).  The attenuation coefficient of benign lymph nodes [2.5 dB/(MHz x cm)] is significantly higher than the mean value of lymph node metastases [1.3 db/(MHz x cm)].  The results demonstrate that involved nodes can principally be differentiated from not involved nodes.  Micrometastases, mixed lymph nodes, and changing echo patterns within inflammatory nodes explain the accuracy rate of 78 percent.
Characterization and significance of sulfonylurea receptors.  This study describes and characterizes a putative sulfonylurea receptor.  The radioligand used was [3H]glipizide (9 Ci/mmol).  The beta-cell plasma membranes were derived from a transplantable rat insulinoma generated by subcutaneous injection of RINm5F cells and purified by ultracentrifugation on a 15-55% sucrose gradient.  Specific binding of [3H]glipizide to purified beta-cell plasma membranes was determined to be maximal at temperatures of 4-23 degrees C, pH 7.3, and an incubation of 2 h.  Scatchard analysis indicated a single binding site with Kd = 7 nM and sulfonylurea binding of 0.93 pmol/mg membrane protein.  Displacement of [3H]glipizide from the purified beta-cell plasma membranes by various sulfonylureas and their analogues correlated well with their known hypoglycemic and insulin-releasing activities.  Various agents, including nutrients, agents affecting Ca2+ flux, gastrointestinal hormones, and pancreatic hormones, had no effect on [3H]glipizide binding to the beta-cell plasma membranes.  Putative sulfonylurea receptors on beta-cell and brain cell plasma membranes have been reported by several groups of investigators.  Sulfonylurea binding to the beta-cell is hypothesized to close an ATP-sensitive K+ channel, which leads to depolarization of the membrane and activation of a voltage-dependent Ca2+ channel.
The effect of metoclopramide on ovarian responsiveness to gonadotropin administration in patients with severe polycystic ovarian syndrome.  Six patients with poor ovarian response to menotropin after pretreatment with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog exhibited improved ovarian responsiveness when metoclopramide was added on days 3, 5, and 7 of the cycle.  This was evidenced by a higher number of leading follicles (4.4 versus 0.6), a higher mean of maximal serum 17 beta-estradiol levels (560 versus 178 pg/mL), a shorter duration of menotropin treatment (7 versus 11 days), and fewer ampules of menotropin used (20 versus 37 ampules/cycle) in metoclopramide-treated cycles as compared with control cycles, respectively.  Serum prolactin levels reached a maximum of 172 ng/mL within 1 hour after metoclopramide administration and declined to normal range within 6 hours.  These results suggest that intermittent increased prolactin secretion may augment ovarian response to gonadotropins.
Aromatase activity of human granulosa cells in patients with polycystic ovaries treated with dexamethasone.  The effect of dexamethasone (DEX) (9 alpha-Fluro-16 alpha-methyl prednisolone) on secretion of steroids by human granulosa luteinized cells was studied by culturing cells from mature follicles of women with polycystic ovarian disease and treated for infertility in the in vitro fertilization program.  Patients were treated with DEX 0.5 mg/d until the day of human chorionic gonadotropin administration.  The cells were cultured for 24 hours in the presence of androstenedione (10(-7)M).  After incubating for 24 hours, the medium was replaced and the cells were incubated for an additional 24 hours.  The medium was then harvested and assayed for estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P).  Results were compared with those of a control group who was not treated with DEX.  Estradiol production by cells was significantly lower in the study group treated with DEX.  Progesterone production was not influenced by DEX.  Follicular fluid levels, E2, and androgens did not vary with DEX treatment, whereas cortisol levels markedly decreased and P levels increased with the treatment.  These findings suggest that glucocorticosteroids can directly influence granulosa luteinized cell function.
Endoscopic ultrasonography for the evaluation of smooth muscle tumors in the upper gastrointestinal tract: an experience with 42 cases.  Before surgery, 12 patients with suspected leiomyoma and 12 patients with suspected leiomyosarcoma were studied by endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS), computed tomography (CT), endoscopy, and barium swallow.  The results were correlated with surgery and histology.  Ten leiomyomas, one benign gastric ulcer, one carcinoid metastasis, eight leiomyosarcomas, two leiomyoblastomas, one mucus secreting adenocarcinoma, and one bronchial carcinoma were diagnosed.  Eighteen additional patients suspected to have benign submucosal lesions by endoscopy and barium meal were treated non-surgically, and studied by EUS and CT.  EUS was superior to other imaging techniques in the detection, staging, and follow-up of submucosal smooth muscle tumors because of clear imaging of the intramural abnormality and adjacent lymph nodes.
Growth of group A rotaviruses in a human liver cell line.  Recent observations in children with rotavirus gastroenteritis and in infant mice given rotavirus vaccine by oral administration suggest that this well-known gastrointestinal pathogen may infect the liver.  To examine this possibility, the susceptibility of Hep G2 cells to infection with a variety of rotavirus strains was tested.  These cells were used because they are considered to be well differentiated and exhibit many liver-specific functions.  The Hep G2 cells supported the growth of the simian strain rhesus rotavirus (MMU 18006), a strain currently being used in vaccine trails, but did not support the growth of any human strain (D, DS1, Price or ST3).  The rhesus rotavirus infection was cytopathic and resulted in release of lactate dehydrogenase.  Rhesus rotavirus growth in Hep G2 cells displayed trypsin-enhanced infectivity and was inhibited by pretreatment of cells with Arthrobacter ureafaciens neuraminidase but not with neuraminidase from Clostridium perfringens.  Hep G2 cells were also permissive for another simian strain (SA11), a bovine strain (UK) and single gene substitution reassortants containing VP7 (the major outer capsid neutralization protein) from a human rotavirus strain and the remaining 10 genes from either rhesus rotavirus or UK.  In general, UK and its reassortants produced lower levels of antigen than did rhesus rotavirus and its reassortants.  Hep G2 cells and other hepatic cell lines may prove to be useful tools to explore the hepatotropic potential of wild-type rotaviruses and candidate vaccine strains.
HBV-DNA sequences in tumor and nontumor tissue in a patient with the fibrolamellar variant of hepatocellular carcinoma.  One patient with the fibrolamellar variant of hepatocellular carcinoma was found to be seropositive for HBsAg and anti-HBe.  DNA from tumor and nontumor areas of the liver was examined by molecular hybridization for hepatitis B virus DNA sequences.  Undigested DNA from the tumor gave a high-molecular-weight smear, and restriction-enzyme analysis indicated a single instance of integration.  Nontumor liver tissue was analyzed from three separate areas.  Hepatitis B virus DNA was detected in two of these; restriction-enzyme digestion suggested they contained different sites of viral integration.  As with the typical hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma, analysis of hepatitis B virus DNA from nontumorous liver yielded a different pattern of high-molecular-weight bands, indicating that the virus genome had integrated at different chromosomal locations than that seen in the tumor.  The finding of integrated hepatitis B virus DNA, especially in tumorous but also in nontumorous liver, would be consistent with an oncogenic role for hepatitis B virus in certain instances of fibrolamellar tumors and in the more typical hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma.
Prognostic factors of hepatocellular carcinoma in the west: a multivariate analysis in 206 patients.  To investigate the prognostic factors in Western patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, 206 patients with confirmed diagnoses of hepatocellular carcinoma were studied in terms of survival.  All patients were diagnosed between 1983 and 1987.  A multivariate survival analysis (Cox regression model) using clinical, biochemical, ultrasonographical and pathological data obtained at diagnosis disclosed that bilirubin (p = 0.0001), ascites (p = 0.0001), toxic syndrome (defined by the presence of weight loss greater than 10% premorbid weight, malaise and anorexia) (p = 0.009), blood urea nitrogen (p = 0.025), tumor size (p = 0.001), gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (p = 0.0006), age (p = 0.0005), serum sodium (p = 0.003) and presence of metastases (p = 0.002) were independent predictors of survival.  According to the contribution of each of these factors to the final model, a prognostic index was constructed allowing division of patients in different groups according to their relative risk of death: RRD = EXP (Age x 0.03 + Ascites x 0.8281 + BUN x 0.0137 + Serum sodium x (-0.0538) + gamma-Glutamyltranspeptidase x 0.0019 + Bilirubin x 0.0734 + Tumor size x 0.33 + Toxic syndrome x 0.4965 + Metastases x 0.55).  These results facilitate the stratification of hepatocellular carcinoma patients to design and evaluate future controlled trials.
Left ventricular fibroma: echocardiographic diagnosis and successful surgical excision in three cases.  The management of three patients with left ventricular fibromas is outlined.  All were asymptomatic children.  Routine chest radiography suggested cardiac masses.  M-mode and two-dimensional echocardiography were valuable adjuncts to conventional angiography in assessing these children.  Electrocardiographic changes, present in all cases, were shown to regress postoperatively.  We stress the importance of these noninvasive aids in the initial investigation and outline our operative methods of reconstruction.
Upper gastrointestinal pathology in familial adenomatous polyposis: results from a prospective study of 102 patients.  Multiple gastric and duodenal biopsy specimens from 102 asymptomatic patients with familial adenomatous polyposis, taken during a prospective endoscopic screening programme were examined.  One hundred patients had microscopic gastroduodenal pathology, often in the absence of macroscopic lesions.  Adenomas were found in 94 patients in the duodenum, in the second and third parts.  Hyperplasia of villous and crypt epithelium was also seen, sometimes in the absence of adenomas: this may be a precursor of neoplastic change.  In the stomach fundic gland polyps were the commonest abnormality, seen microscopically in 44 patients.  Chronic antral gastritis was common in patients without fundic polyps.  Gastric adenomas were present in six patients, all of whom also had duodenal adenomas.  If duodenal adenomas in familial adenomatous polyposis have a similar malignant potential to those in the colorectum sequential endoscopy and biopsy are necessary to detect cancer in these patients.
Activation and inducer subset phenotype of the lymphocytic infiltrate around epidermally derived tumors.  An in situ analysis of the mononuclear cell infiltrate found in association with a range of benign, premalignant, and malignant epidermal tumors is described.  The predominant cell phenotype was that of the recently described immunoregulatory helper/inducer T lymphocyte.  A large number of lymphocytes expressed antigens associated with cellular activation, suggesting an ongoing immunologic response by the host against the tumor, although evidence of in situ proliferation of these cells was lacking.  These findings suggest that the infiltrate found in association with cutaneous tumors does not represent passive accumulation of lymphocytes from the circulation but rather an active antitumor response.
Benign lymphangioendothelioma.  We have studied eight cases of an acquired lymphatic endothelial lesion for which we propose the name "benign lymphangioendothelioma." The lesions developed as solitary, slowly extending, erythematous macules and plaques, usually occurring on the extremities or the shoulders in adolescents or adults.  The characteristic histopathologic feature is permeation of the dermal collagen by flattened, endothelium-lined channels and spaces.  Hemorrhage, iron deposition, and inflammation were not part of the lesion.  Ulex europaeus agglutinin I labeled the lesional endothelial cells consistently, but factor VIII-related antigen labeling was negative.  This histologic pattern and the special studies suggested a lymphatic lesion.  Surgical excision, performed in six patients, was not followed by recurrence.
Cutaneous surgery and the pregnant patient.  Cutaneous surgery in 34 pregnant women is described.  The main indication for surgery was the diagnosis and/or treatment of malignancy.  Surgery during the period of organogenesis (15 to 56 days) should be avoided when possible.  Patients should be positioned on the left side during the procedure to avoid the supine hypotensive syndrome.  Monitoring of the fetal heartbeat is desirable.  Local anesthetics, penicillin, and erythromycin are safe if used carefully.  Acetaminophen is the analgesic of choice.  Exposure to the sun should be avoided during the perioperative period.
Comparison of methods for checking surgical margins.  Surgical margins of a cutaneous neoplasm can be evaluated by various combinations of three major types of sections: vertical (perpendicular), horizontal (parallel), and oblique (Mohs method).  Vertical sections may run transversely through tumor (breadloaf method), longitudinally through tumor (breadloaf-cross method), or peripheral to the tumor.  The peripheral (perimeter) sectioning methods are the only methods that can evaluate almost 100% of the margin, but they have the disadvantage of not showing the relationship of the tumor to its margin, which can be seen clearly with the vertical transverse sections.  Seven methods of checking surgical margins are compared and contrasted.  None of these is judged to be perfect or best.
Years of potential life lost: another indicator of the impact of cutaneous malignant melanoma on society.  Years of potential life lost (YPLL) is an indicator of premature mortality that complements traditional incidence and mortality rates and that facilitates comparisons among different cancers.  We calculated YPLL from cutaneous melanoma and 11 other cancers routinely recorded and tracked by Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER).  YPLL from cutaneous melanoma ranked eighth for persons younger than 65 years of age and fourth for those 20 to 49 years of age.  An average of 17.1 YPLL per death were due to melanoma, one of the highest rates for adult-onset cancers.  The results of our study, the first to apply YPLL to cutaneous melanoma, emphasize the disproportionate impact of this cancer on young and middle-aged adults and reemphasize the importance of this cancer as a public health priority.
Trends in basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and melanoma of the skin from 1973 through 1987.  Major increases have occurred in the incidence of basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, as well as in cutaneous malignant melanoma during the period 1973 through 1987 in British Columbia.  The greatest increases in basal and squamous cell carcinomas are on the head and neck.  This indicates that exposure to sunlight is the major causative factor.  The greatest increase in melanoma is on the trunk in men and on the lower limbs in women.  The dramatic increases in nonmelanoma skin cancers in British Columbia, a relatively low sunlight area, suggest that major prevention programs are needed in areas that are not considered "sunspots.".
Effect of gastric mucus on the uptake of the carcinogen MNNG by gastric mucosal DNA.  In prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)-, pirenzepine-, and indomethacin-administered rats, the incorporation of N-[methyl-3H]-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine ([methyl-3H]MNNG) into gastric mucosal DNA was measured quantitatively by liquid scintillation counting after intragastric instillation of [methyl-3H]MNNG.  The amount of incorporation was 25.4 +/- 5.9 pmol/mg DNA in control rats, 11.7 +/- 3.8 pmol/mg DNA in PGE2-administered rats, 6.2 +/- 5.6 pmol/mg DNA in pirenzepine-administered rats, and 42.9 +/- 14.4 pmol/mg DNA in indomethacin-administered rats.  PGE2 and pirenzepine significantly decreased the incorporation as compared with the control group.  In contrast, indomethacin increased the incorporation.  In addition, gastric mucosa of these drug-treated rats was studied histochemically.  PGE2 and pirenzepine increased secretion of gastric mucus whereas indomethacin decreased it.  It is possible that gastric mucus has a protective effect not only against ulcerogenic agents but also against carcinogens.  It is considered that gastric mucus plays an important role in the defense mechanism against carcinogenesis.
Campylobacter pylori interactions with gastric cell tissue culture.  Many investigators have reported that gastric mucosal biopsies of patients with chronic gastritis and peptic ulcer disease show the presence of Campylobacter pylori in a large majority of cases.  Histologic examinations of such tissues indicate a close approximation of C.  pylori with gastric surface epithelial cells.  A recent report has described both adherence and cell invasion of gastric cells by C.  pylori.  Using a transmission electron microscope, we have examined the interaction between C.  pylori, C.  jejuni, and E.  coli in vitro with a gastric cancer cell line, Kato III.  Our results indicate marked toxicity of E.  coli and moderate toxicity of C.  jejuni for Kato III cells.  C.  pylori had only a minor effect on tissue culture viability.  C.  pylori was found to have a strong association with the Kato III cell membranes and evidence of occasional cell invasion.  Both C.  jejuni and E.  coli showed no attachment or association with the Kato III cells.  We interpret these findings as indicating that C.  pylori may have a specific adhesion for gastric cells.
Rectal carcinoma: CT staging with water as contrast medium.  Computed tomography (CT) was used to study 42 patients with rectal carcinoma.  Water was used as a contrast medium for studying the local extent of tumor in all patients.  Scans were read prospectively without knowledge of the histologic staging and then compared with pathologic specimens.  CT depicted the tumor in all patients.  Comparison of CT and histologic results (following the Dukes classification) showed that disease was correctly staged as A in three of four patients, as B in eight of 12, as C in 15 of 17, and as D in nine of nine.  Overall, carcinoma was correctly staged with CT in 35 of 42 patients (diagnostic accuracy, 83.3%).  The accuracy in the assessment of local invasion was 97.6% (41 of 42).  In the detection of lymph node involvement, the accuracy was 78.6% (sensitivity, 88%; specificity, 64.7%).  CT is recommended in the preoperative staging of rectal carcinoma and as an aid in choosing the appropriate therapy.  The use of water enema and complete distention of the rectum are reliable techniques for improving the accuracy of CT in the assessment of local invasion by cancer.
Effect of somatostatin analogue (octreotide) on blood flow to endocrine tumors metastatic to the liver: angiographic evaluation.  The effect of an octapeptide analogue of somatostatin, octreotide, on tumor blood flow was evaluated with angiography in eight patients with hepatic endocrine tumors; one patient had primary intrahepatic gastrinoma, two patients had hepatic metastases from gastrinomas, two patients had VIPomas (vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-secreting tumor), and three patients had carcinoid tumors.  Octreotide caused a marked decrease in tumor blood flow in two patients with gastrinomas and two with VIPomas.  One patient could not be evaluated due to the lack of a tumor blush on a control angiogram.  In patients with carcinoid tumors, octreotide caused a slight reduction in blood flow through the tumors in two patients, while there was no change in one patient.  Octreotide markedly decreased gastrin and gastric acid secretion in two of three patients with gastrinomas, lowered VIP and stopped the diarrhea in patients with VIPomas, and controlled symptoms in two of three patients with carcinoid tumors.  The vasoactive effect of octreotide on hepatic endocrine tumors may be a direct action on tumor blood supply or secondary to inhibition of the endocrine tumor cell secretion and consequent decreased blood flow.
Direct interaction of a ligand for the erbB2 oncogene product with the EGF receptor and p185erbB2.  The erbB2 oncogene encodes a 185-kilodalton transmembrane protein whose sequence is similar to the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).  A 30-kilodalton factor (gp30) secreted from MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells was shown to be a ligand for p185erbB2.  An antibody to EGFR abolished the tyrosine phosphorylation induced by EGF and transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) but only partially blocked that produced by gp30 in SK-BR-3 breast cancer cells.  In two cell lines that overexpress erbB2 but do not expresss EGFR (MDA-MB-453 breast cancer cells and a Chinese hamster ovary cell line that had been transfected with erbB2), phosphorylation of p185erbB2 was induced only by gp30.  The gp30 specifically inhibited the growth of cells that overexpressed p185erbB2.  An antibody to EGFR had no effect on the inhibition of SK-BR-3 cell colony formation obtained with gp30.  Thus, it appeared that gp30 interacted directly with the EGFR and erbB2.  Direct binding of gp30 to p185erbB2 was confirmed by binding competition experiments, where gp30 was found to displace the p185erbB2 binding of a specific antibody to p185erbB2.  The evidence described here suggests that gp30 is a ligand for p185erbB2.
Carcinoma of the male breast: a review of 41 cases.  We reviewed the cases of 41 consecutive men treated for breast carcinoma from 1950 through 1987 at Vanderbilt University Affiliated Hospitals to examine controversies in and methods of therapy for this disease.  Twenty-two patients (52%) had stage I or II lesions potentially curable by operative therapy.  The overall 5-year survival rates were 100% for stage I, 65% for stage II, 56% for stage III, and 0% for stage IV.  Radical mastectomy offered no advantage over modified radical mastectomy in terms of survival or rate of recurrence.  Diagnosis at an early clinical stage and no finding of disease in axillary lymph nodes were important factors in survival in this series of patients.  All tumors evaluated for hormone receptors were positive.  Although experience was limited, encouraging results were obtained with the use of tamoxifen citrate in adjuvant as well as palliative roles.  With the exception of a predominance of centrally located lesions and a uniquely high frequency of positive hormone receptor status, carcinoma of the male breast appears biologically similar to the disease in women, and treatment should be guided by similar principles.
Malignant melanoma and pigmented lesions: a diagnostic and management dilemma.  We document two cases of malignancy occurring at the site of partially removed benign nevi.  Because of the difficulty in clinical diagnosis and the uncertainty in its behavior, we propose that any recurring melanocytic nevus expanding beyond the original surgical scar be re-excised and the specimen carefully analyzed to ensure complete removal.
Results of conservative surgery and radiation therapy for breast cancer.  For stage I or II breast cancer, conservative surgery and radiation therapy are as effective as modified radical or radical mastectomy.  In most cases, cosmetic considerations and the availability of therapy are the primary concerns.  The extent of a surgical resection less than a mastectomy has not been a subject of a randomized trial and is controversial.  It appears that removal of a quadrant of the breast for small lesions is safe but excessive.  Using histologic findings in the biopsy as a guide, it may be possible to limit the breast resection to gross tumor removal for most patients while using wider resections for patients with an extensive intraductal component or for invasive lobular carcinoma.  It also appears that excluding patients from breast conservation on the basis of positive margins on the first attempt at tumor excision may be unnecessarily restrictive.  Although patients with an extensive intraductal component or invasive lobular carcinoma should have negative margins, it appears that a patient with predominantly invasive ductal carcinoma can be treated without re-excision if all gross tumor has been resected and there is no reason to suspect extensive microscopic disease.  Patients with indeterminate margins should have a re-excision.  Axillary dissection provides prognostic information and prevents progression of the disease within the axilla.  Axillary dissections limited to level I will accurately identify a substantial number of patients who have pathologically positive but clinically negative nodes.  When combined with radiation therapy to the axilla, a level I dissection results in a limited number of patients with progressive axillary disease.  Patients with pathologically positive axillas and patients at particularly high risk for systemic disease because of the extent of axillary node involvement can be identified by dissections of levels I and II.  Radiation therapy can be avoided safely in patients who have pathologically negative axillas by level I and II dissection.  There appears to be no advantage to routine dissection of level III lymph nodes.  Lymphedema of the arm and breast increases with more extensive dissections and with radiation therapy.
Role of mastectomy in breast cancer.  The surgical management of breast cancer continues to evolve in an attempt to define the ideal line between therapeutic efficacy and morbidity.  It is clear that breast cancer is a biologically heterogeneous group of diseases, and no single hypothesis explains its behavior.  The surgical options proposed to the individual patient must draw from the experience of retrospective clinical studies and prospective randomized trials in an attempt to optimize the treatment plan.  Most patients without distant disease are eligible to consider mastectomy, which can accomplish excellent local control and significantly improve survival for earlier stages of disease.  However, breast conservation remains an appropriate alternative for a carefully defined subset of patients.  Today, with early-stage disease, no patient need leave the operating room without a breast.  Recent advances in reconstructive surgery make mastectomy with immediate reconstruction or limited resection plus axillary dissection with postoperative radiation therapy the two principal treatment choices available.  Future studies will focus on the integration of other treatment modalities.  Clinical research into the use of preoperative chemotherapy to downstage the disease to permit less extensive surgery is of interest.  Recent application of molecular biologic techniques such as oncogene analysis, cytogenetic studies, proliferative indices, and the highly sensitive detection of distant micrometastases using monoclonal antibodies may assist in the design of innovative approaches to surgery, radiation therapy, and systemic drug treatment.  These advances show great promise for improving the quality of life and the cure rate for patients with breast cancer.  Today, surgical treatment options have evolved that fulfill some of the objectives outlined by Dr.  James Ewing of Memorial Hospital some 50 years ago.  His concerns about breast cancer remain as relevant today as they were half a century ago: "I have drawn the impression that in dealing with mammary cancer, surgery meets with more peculiar difficulties and uncertainties than with almost any other form of the disease.  The anatomical types are so numerous, the variations in clinical course so wide, the paths of dissemination so free and diverse, the difficulties of determining the actual conditions so complex, and the sacrifice of tissues so great, as to render impossible in the majority of cases a reasonably accurate adjustment of a means to an end.".
Selection of breast-preservation therapy for primary invasive breast carcinoma.  Breast-preservation treatment for primary breast cancer should not be used for all women.  Women frequently excluded from consideration for such treatment or who choose not to have it may be elderly and not concerned about cosmetic appearance or live at a distance so that 6 weeks of daily trips to radiotherapy would be inconvenient or even impossible.  Also, if radiotherapeutic expertise or facilities are not available, a breast-preservation program is difficult.  In Massachusetts, a full course of just over 6000 cGy (4500 cGy to the whole breast and a 1600-cGy local boost) costs roughly $6000.  Thus, breast preservation is more expensive than mastectomy even with reconstruction, as patients still frequently require a hospital admission with general anesthesia for an axillary dissection.  Although insurance policies cover such expenses, patients who do not have insurance or have inadequate coverage may find the extra expense of the breast-preservation technique burdensome or impossible.  Women with a small breast and a proportionately large cancer may have an unsatisfactory cosmetic outcome after appropriate lumpectomy.  The cosmetic result in such patients frequently cannot be predicted beforehand; this fact adds emphasis to the need for a two-step process of lumpectomy and then re-evaluation of the cosmetic outcome as well as pathologic features for decisions regarding breast preservation.  Finally, women may have strikingly different attitudes toward breast preservation than expected by the surgeon.  For some women, the urge to preserve the breast is so strong that they will accept virtually any risk to achieve this option, whereas for other women, the constant anxiety about a recurrence or undergoing radiation therapy is traumatic enough that they readily accept mastectomy.  In our referral surgical oncology practice, roughly 60% of patients are currently treated with breast-preservation techniques; the remainder undergo mastectomy, with immediate reconstruction in approximately three fourths of the cases.  The proportion of patients who elect to have breast preservation depends greatly on local medical customs and attitudes; the radiotherapeutic skills available; women's attitudes, which frequently are dependent on the local press and publicity; and the surgeon's interest and enthusiasm for such a program.  There is no appropriate proportion of patients who should be treated by breast-preservation techniques, but clearly, the proportion of patients so treated increases with experience, acceptability, publicity, and availability.  Thus, the selection of breast-preserving therapy for individual patients is a result of an extraordinary array of factors that need to be considered in each patient.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
Selection of therapy for stage III breast cancer.  Locally advanced breast cancer is a heterogenous group including both operable and inoperable lesions.  Local surgery or radiation alone produces poor survival rates, indicating micrometastases at diagnosis.  Systemic chemotherapy as part of multimodality regimens has increased the length and rate of disease-free survival.
Adjuvant chemotherapy of breast cancer.  Many women will not be cured of breast cancer by even the best early detection and surgical techniques because of micrometastases present at diagnosis.  Adjuvant therapy has extended the disease-free interval for most patients and lengthens overall survival for many.  Combination chemotherapy has become the standard form of adjuvant treatment for premenopausal women with breast cancer and positive lymph nodes after primary therapy.  With minimal toxicity, disease-free and overall survival are improved.  Results are less impressive or less clear-cut for postmenopausal women or any woman with negative lymph nodes.  Long-term toxicities of adjuvant chemotherapy may include second malignancies and cardiac dysfunction.  Although these complications probably are rare, they must be considered seriously when weighing chemotherapy for patients in whom its benefits may be slight.  Innovations likely to become standard in adjuvant therapy decision making include risk assessment with new prognostic indicators (growth fraction, oncogene expression) and investigation of dose intensification using bone marrow growth factors and autologous stem-cell support.
Adjuvant antiestrogen therapy for breast cancer. Past, present, and future.  Laboratory investigations using animal models of breast cancer growth have indicated that the antiestrogenic compound tamoxifen is a tumoristatic agent.  It is therefore effective in suppressing, rather than destroying, the breast tumor.  Its use as an adjuvant in breast cancer management has been successful, with a proportion of women benefiting from long periods of tamoxifen treatment.  All the initial studies recruited postmenopausal women, but tamoxifen is now proposed for the treatment of premenopausal women for an extended time.  Naturally, there are many aspects of the toxicology of tamoxifen to consider; however, careful monitoring of clinical trials will determine the safety of the drug for the general patient population.
Management of local and regional recurrence after mastectomy or breast-conserving treatment.  Locoregional failures after primary treatment for breast cancer include a diverse group of lesions that represent different categories of failures with various prognoses.  Although patients with chest wall recurrences and regional nodal failures after traditional radical surgery have a poor prognosis, many patients can still achieve a significant degree of palliation and even long-term survival or cure with carefully orchestrated multimodal treatment.  In patients who have breast failures after breast-conservation surgery and radiation, long-term salvage and cure can be achieved for the majority with prompt detection and appropriate treatment, which, like treatment for primary breast cancer, includes a consideration not only of local control but also of the risk of subsequent systemic failure and its need for treatment.
Reconstruction after mastectomy.  Advances in materials and techniques, especially those involving transposition of muscle and skin flaps, have made breast reconstruction possible for most women who undergo mastectomy for breast cancer.  The availability of this option can alleviate the breast and chest wall deformity that results from virtually all local treatment of breast cancer.  It is essential that the reconstruction surgeon be part of the breast cancer management team from the beginning of treatment planning and that this surgeon work closely with the general surgeon, medical oncologist, and radiation therapist as well as the adjunctive treatment team members.  The patient's clinical status and the type of local treatment will be significant determinants of the reconstructive options.  For women with stage I breast cancer, these decisions may be based largely on the oncologist's local and adjunctive therapy procedures and the woman's desire to proceed or delay.  For women with systemic disease, all members of the breast management team may need to agree on the advisability and timing of reconstruction.  Central to all of the numerous decisions described in this paper regarding the timing, type, and extent of breast reconstruction is the primary goal of the entire team: the best possible management of the breast cancer itself.  The promise of attractive, symmetric, and natural appearing breasts, complete with a symmetric nipple-areolar complex, has eased somewhat the diminishment of self-esteem and the threat to femininity that can accompany the loss of a breast.  By lowering fear, the widely recognized availability of breast reconstruction may encourage more women to monitor their breasts and seek diagnosis of changes and may influence selection of the type of local treatment if cancer is detected.  Because of the psychological and cultural significance of the breast, the reconstructive surgeon must be particularly sensitive to the psychological and aesthetic expectations of the patient.  Even in those patients with metastases and limited life expectancy, breast reconstruction can enhance the quality of life.
Bilateral breast cancer.  A second primary breast cancer in the opposite breast can be either synchronous or metachronous.  The majority are metachronous.  A woman who has had breast cancer has a fivefold increase in risk for a second breast cancer.  Additional risk factors include multifocal cancer, lobular carcinoma in situ, and an original cancer at an early age with long survival.  Lobular carcinoma in situ is predominantly a marker for the subsequent development of a second primary breast cancer.  The incidence of synchronous bilateral cancer is approximately 1% to 2% and that of metachronous cancer 5% to 6%.  The cancer can be invasive or noninvasive.  Mammography has increased the number of synchronous cancers found but not the overall incidence.  The incidence of invasive cancer detected by random biopsy of the opposite breast is not high enough to justify routine adoption of this procedure.  The remaining breast must be followed for the remainder of the patient's life by physical examination and annual mammography.  The treatment of the secondary primary breast cancer should be that appropriate for the stage of the disease.  The prognosis for the woman with a second primary breast cancer is quite favorable and is dependent on the stage of both the first and the second cancer.
Breast cancer during pregnancy and lactation.  Breast cancer is the most frequently seen cancer in pregnancy and lactation, but the incidence is low, the disease being seen in approximately 0.03% of pregnancies.  Only 1% to 2% of breast cancer overall is diagnosed during pregnancy or lactation.  There is no evidence to implicate pregnancy or lactation in either the etiology or the progression of breast cancer.  Careful breast examination early in the pregnancy is very important to find solid masses that require biopsy before breast engorgement hides them.  Therapeutic options vary, depending on the stage of disease and the stage of the pregnancy.  Operable disease in the first 6 to 7 months of the pregnancy should be treated by mastectomy, as irradiation is contraindicated.  Late in the pregnancy, a lumpectomy and axillary dissection can be done, with irradiation being delayed until after delivery.  General anesthesia is safe if the usual precautions are taken to compensate for the physiologic changes induced by pregnancy.  Unfortunately, delay in diagnosis is common, and 70% to 89% of patients with operable primary lesions have positive axillary lymph nodes.  Late stage appears to be the only reason for the generally worse prognosis in these patients, as stage for stage, they have a course similar to that of nonpregnant patients.  Adjuvant chemotherapy can be considered late in the pregnancy but should usually be delayed until after delivery.  In patients with locally advanced or metastatic cancer diagnosed early in the pregnancy, for whom both chemotherapy and radiation therapy would normally be recommended, consideration must be given to termination of the pregnancy.  There is no evidence that termination of pregnancy improves the outlook for the patients, but it does permit standard aggressive therapy in advanced disease.
Male breast cancer.  Male breast cancer is uncommon but important.  The diagnosis is easily made by breast biopsy, and patients are presenting earlier in the course of the disease than in the past.  Despite this, patients are often first seen with tumors that have metastasized to the axillary nodes, which markedly decreases the survival rate.  Therapy of localized disease includes simple excision, modified radical mastectomy, and radical mastectomy, but there is no consensus for which operation is appropriate.  Radiation therapy should be strongly considered in patients with metastases to the axillary nodes, but the role of adjuvant hormonal therapy or chemotherapy is unclear.  For treatment of disseminated disease, tamoxifen seems to be replacing orchiectomy.  The favorable response rate, especially in patients with estrogen-receptor-positive tumors, the lack of side effects, and the high level of patient acceptability make it an attractive therapeutic choice.
Clinical problems in follow-up of patients after conservative surgery and radiotherapy.  Patients treated with conservative surgery and radiotherapy for early-stage breast carcinoma are at risk of developing an ipsilateral breast recurrence for a long period.  Fortunately, few such patients present with an inoperable recurrence or simultaneous distant metastases.  Salvage rates are high and may be improved by early detection.  Although usually unambiguous, physical examination of the treated breast may reveal changes attributable to surgery and radiotherapy that can mimic a recurrent cancer.  There also is substantial overlap in radiologic appearance between benign and malignant lesions.  It may be necessary to perform a biopsy when there is a question of recurrence.  Careful life-long follow-up of patients thus is a critical part of their care.
Trends in primary breast cancer management. Where are we going?  The treatment of cancer during any period has been based not on the whim of a clinician but on the therapeutic consequences of the dominant biologic model of the disease.  Until the 1960s, the dominant model of breast cancer was of a disease that spread centrifugally along anatomic pathways, with time being the only determinant of prognosis.  An alternative model, that of biologic determinism, posits that the outcomes of treatment are determined by the extent of microscopic dissemination that occurred before the tumor became detectable.  This model, too, has flaws, and the author suggests that it is time for a Kuhnian paradigm shift.  Breast cancer exhibits a heterogeneity of phenotypes resulting from one or perhaps two mutations.  The multiple prognostic variables may be epiphenomena, expressing different degrees of amplification of a limited domain of the genome.
Prognostic indicators in invasive breast cancer.  Tumor size and axillary lymph node involvement are the primary determinants of clinical course for most patients.  Receptors for estrogen and progesterone are important additional prognostic factors for disease-free survival, overall survival, survival time after initial disease recurrence, and the likelihood of response to hormonal therapy.  Histologic grading has merit as a prognostic factor, although poor reproducibility limits its broad application.  Promising data have been emerging from the use of flow cytometry to analyze DNA content and proliferative rate.  Patients with aneuploid tumors are more likely to have a shorter survival time than patients with diploid tumors.  A high S-phase fraction also identifies a subset of patients at increased risk for early relapse.  A combined index of ploidy and S-phase may be a more useful guide; together, diploidy and low S-phase identify a subgroup of node-negative patients at very low risk for disease recurrence.  A number of oncogenes have been identified in breast cancer; amplification of the HER-2/neu gene or overexpression of the gene product may be an important prognostic indicator for node-positive patients.
Carcinoma of the thyroglossal duct.  A review of 39 instances of excision of a cyst of the thyroglossal duct performed at St.  Paul Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, revealed two patients with carcinoma of the thyroglossal duct.  A review of the English literature yielded 146 instances of this uncommon tumor.  Eighty-four per cent were papillary adenocarcinoma of thyroid type and 5 per cent were squamous cell carcinoma.  The patients were from six to 81 years old with a 2:1 female to male ratio.  Metastatic disease to lymph nodes was noted in 11 per cent and invasion of overlying strap muscles was found in 4 per cent.  Carcinoma of the thyroid gland occurred in 14 per cent.  Preoperative diagnosis was rare.  The Sistrunk procedure is recommended for initial surgical therapy with further surgical or adjuvant therapy dependent on associated clinical findings.  Prognosis for carcinoma of the thyroglossal duct of thyroid type parallels that of carcinoma of the thyroid gland.
An unusual epidural, vascular spinal lipoma in a 3-year-old child: a case report and review of the literature.  Epidural lipomas are usually benign tumors affecting the spinal cord.  We report the unusual presentation of a cervicothoracic spinal lipoma associated with a cervical dysraphism in a young boy.  Diagnostic options using magnetic resonance imaging and gadolinium-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid are discussed as a pathway to early diagnosis of these and other occult spinal lesions.
Neonatal intracranial teratomas.  Two neonates with intracranial teratomas presented with cranial enlargements a few weeks after birth.  Both cases underwent surgery: one died intraoperatively; the other is the longest known survivor, alive 7 years and 9 months after subtotal excision of a mature teratoma of the left sylvian fissure.  Previous operations have been relatively few and nearly all have been unsuccessful.  Size and favorable location may be the most important prognostic features regardless of the histologic classification as mature or immature.  One of our cases demonstrates that even subtotal excision of a mature teratoma can result in long-term survival.
Prospective evaluation of clinical and pathologic detection of axillary metastases in patients with carcinoma of the breast.  Complete axillary dissection was performed in 287 patients undergoing modified radical mastectomy between 1984 and 1987 to identify patterns of axillary node metastases, as well as discontinuous axillary node ("skip") metastases.  Positive pathologic findings were compared with preoperative clinical examinations in 266 patients and showed only 60 cases (22.6%) clinically suspicious for tumor, in contrast to 131 (45.6%) with pathologically confirmed positive lymph nodes.  Axillary contents were classified level I, II, or III based on their relationship to the pectoralis minor muscle.  An average of 24.2 nodes was resected per patient (level I, 10; level II, 8.1; and level III, 5.3).  Tumors ranged in size from 0.5 to 12.0 cm (mean, 2.6 cm), and increasing tumor size was associated with an increased likelihood of positive nodes.  The data on 204 patients with complete clinical and pathologic data show that of 119 patients with negative level I nodes a limited axillary dissection (level I only) would fail to identify 6 with positive level II and 2 with positive level III nodes, whereas of 85 patients with positive level I nodes limited axillary dissection would fail to identify 17 with positive level II nodes, 7 with positive level III nodes, and 27 with positive levels II and III nodes.  Complete axillary dissection (levels I, II, and III) should be performed to stage patients accurately, as well as to remove tumor-involved nodes and diminish local axillary recurrences.  Clinical examination of the axilla appears to be a poor means of identifying axillary metastatic cancer.
Short-term tamoxifen plus chemotherapy: superior results in node-positive breast cancer.  Three hundred eleven patients with node-positive breast cancer were randomized to one of three adjuvant treatments: cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil; all of the above with tamoxifen citrate; or all of the above with tamoxifen and bacillus Calmette-Guerin vaccination.  Local therapy for all patients was a modified radical mastectomy.  Estrogen receptors were measured on all primary tumors.  Patients were stratified by the number of positive nodes (one to three nodes and more than three nodes) and estrogen-receptor value (less than 3 femtomole/mg and greater than or equal to 3 femtomole/mg).  Follow-up is available, with a mean of 9.1 and maximum of 14.2 years.  In this study the efficacy of short-term tamoxifen is apparent over that of chemoimmunotherapy alone and continues to be significant with prolonged follow-up.  The addition of tamoxifen to chemoimmunotherapy significantly prolonged disease-free survival among patients with estrogen receptor-positive tumors who were postmenopausal, who had larger tumors (greater than 3 cm), or who had more extensive axillary node involvement (more than three nodes).  Tamoxifen improved overall survival for patients with estrogen receptor-positive tumors larger than 3 cm.  The addition of bacillus Calmette-Guerin Cytoxan, methotrexate, 5-fluorouracil, and tamoxifen did not significantly alter disease-free or overall survival.
Is DNA ploidy of prognostic significance in stage I cutaneous melanoma?  Recent studies have suggested that the presence of DNA aneuploidy in stage I cutaneous melanoma carries a poor prognosis.  To see if our experience correlated with these reports, we used DNA analysis by flow cytometry of propidium iodide-stained nuclei disaggregated from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue of biopsy specimens to retrospectively study 55 patients who had cutaneous stage I melanomas.  The patients had been treated from 1977 to 1987 with a mean follow-up of 5.4 years.  Thirty-nine (71%) of the 55 histograms were diploid, and 16 (29%) of the histograms were aneuploid.  DNA content was significantly associated with other conventional prognostic factors, including growth pattern, ulceration, pathologic stage, tumor thickness, and Clark's level.  DNA aneuploidy was significantly related to disease-free survival and predicted a poorer prognosis (p less than 0.05), but when stratified for tumor thickness it lost significance.  A multivariate discriminant function analysis of 12 factors in melanoma showed six factors to be independently significant in determining prognosis.  DNA content (p = 0.034) ranked fifth in importance behind growth pattern (p less than 0.001), ulceration (p less than 0.001), thickness (p = 0.001), and pathologic stage (p less than 0.005).  DNA content, although significantly associated with conventional prognostic factors and disease-free survival, is not the best indicator of biologic behavior of melanomas in this study.  Further investigation into its usefulness is necessary before DNA content can become a routine diagnostic modality in the work-up of stage I cutaneous melanomas.
Local recurrence after curative resection of colorectal adenocarcinoma.  A total of 853 patients with 861 colorectal adenocarcinomas were operated on at our institution between 1965 and 1981.  Complete follow-up information was obtained in all but six patients (99.4%), and all available histologic slides were reviewed to determine pathologic stage and characteristics.  Six hundred fifty-one patients (76.3%) underwent a potentially curative procedure, and their operative mortality rate was 2.8%.  Of the 627 patients available for analysis, 50 (8%) had a local recurrence.  The median time to local recurrence was 18 months, and only 16% of local recurrences were diagnosed 5 years after the original resection.  Median survival of patients with a local recurrence was 3 1/2 years from the original resection, and 16 patients (32%) survived 5 years or longer.  A multivariate logistic regression analysis was conducted to examine the influence of several clinical and pathologic characteristics on local recurrence among Dukes' stages B and C adenocarcinomas (n = 539) after exclusion of patients with synchronous tumors (n = 8), postoperative deaths (n = 18), loss to follow-up (n = 6), or incomplete data (n = 11).  This analysis revealed that the local recurrence rate was significantly related to depth of invasion (B1 + C1 = 0%; B2 + C1 = 10%; p less than 0.01), site of origin (right plus transverse colon = 6%; left plus rectosigmoid colon = 10%; rectum = 12%; p less than 0.05), and lymphatic or capillary microinvasion (absent, 6%; present, 14%; p less than 0.05).  This analysis attempts to identify patients at high risk for development of local recurrent disease to select candidates for postoperative adjuvant therapy.
Effective ultraviolet irradiation of platelet concentrates in teflon bags.  Several plastic materials used in blood storage were evaluated for their ability to transmit ultraviolet B (UVB) light.  A plastic bag manufactured from sheets of transparent Teflon efficiently (78-86%) transmitted UVB light and was employed in subsequent functional studies of lymphocytes and platelets exposed to UVB light while contained in these bags.  In vitro experiments showed a UVB dose-dependent abrogation of lymphocyte responder and stimulator functions, with concurrent preservation of platelet aggregation responses.  In a phase I pilot study, UVB-treated platelet concentrates were administered to four bone marrow transplant recipients.  Adverse effects attributable to the transfusions were not observed, and patients showed clinically effective transfusion responses.  No patient developed lymphocytotoxic HLA or platelet antibodies.  These studies suggest that platelets can be effectively irradiated with UVB light in a closed system.  However, numerous variables, including container material, volume and composition of contents, steady exposure versus agitation, and exact UV wavelength, must be considered.
Squamous cell carcinoma antigen (TA-4) in penile carcinoma.  TA-4 antigen, originally isolated from women with squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix, is elevated in the sera of patients with squamous cell carcinomas of several sites, including esophagus, lungs, and head and neck.  In this study, we compared the serum levels of TA-4 in normal volunteers, patients with resected penile squamous cell carcinoma, and patients with metastatic penile squamous cell carcinoma.  TA-4 values were elevated in 5 of 11 patients (45%) who had metastatic disease.  In 2, TA-4 was normal the first time metastasis was clinically detected but rose as the disease progressed.  Moreover, in 3 patients in whom serial determinations were made, serum TA-4 values correlated well with disease progression and response to treatment.  We conclude that TA-4 values are elevated in some patients with metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the penis and may become a useful marker for monitoring response to therapy.
Uneventful delivery following series of successive treatments for virilized Cushing syndrome due to adrenocortical carcinoma.  A twenty-one-year-old virilized woman with Cushing syndrome due to a huge adrenocortical carcinoma was successively treated with trilostane (3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase inhibitor), subsequent adrenalectomy, and postoperative cis-platinum.  Clinical or biochemical abnormalities peculiar to Cushing syndrome gradually subsided, and three and one-half years after the adrenal surgery, the patient delivered a normal female infant.  This study points out some of the clinical and biochemical responses of each treatment.
Selenium. Nutritional, toxicologic, and clinical aspects   Despite the recent findings of environmental contamination, selenium toxicosis in humans is exceedingly rare in the United States, with the few known cases resulting from industrial accidents and an episode involving the ingestion of superpotent selenium supplements.  Chronic selenosis is essentially unheard of in this country because of the typical diversity of the American diet.  Nonetheless, because of the growing public interest in selenium as a dietary supplement and the occurrence of environmental selenium contamination, medical practitioners should be familiar with the nutritional, toxicologic, and clinical aspects of this trace element.
Apocrine mammary carcinoma. A clinicopathologic study of 72 cases.  Apocrine carcinoma (AC) is an uncommon, poorly characterized type of breast tumor.  In this review, 55 patients with intraductal (ID) AC and 17 patients with infiltrating (IF) AC were analyzed retrospectively to define the histologic features and clinical course of this neoplasm.  Recurrences in the breast occurred in 3 of 20 ID-AC patients treated by biopsy alone, but not in the 2 patients who received local radiation therapy after biopsy.  One patient with ID-AC had axillary metastases at the time of treatment by mastectomy and died of disease five years later.  The remaining patients with ID-AC treated by mastectomy have remained disease free.  One of the three patients with IF-AC treated by biopsy alone died of disease, and one of two patients with IF-AC treated by biopsy and radiotherapy was alive with carcinoma.  Twelve patients with IF-AC were treated by mastectomy.  Ten of them were recurrence free at the time of last observation.  More than one-third of the cases of ID-AC and IF-AC were detected by mammography alone.  Survival analysis of IF-AC cases compared with nonapocrine duct carcinoma cases matched for stage revealed no statistical difference in estimated recurrence-free survival or estimated survival probability.  AC is a distinct morphologic entity with a natural history similar to that of nonapocrine ductal carcinoma.
Bcr/abl recombinant DNA analysis versus karyotype in the diagnosis and therapeutic monitoring of chronic myeloid leukemia.  Karyotype and bcr/abl recombinant DNA analyses are two means of detecting the chromosomal aberration in chronic myeloid leukemia.  The authors compared these two methods in a retrospective study of 36 patients with CML in which they found the bcr/abl DNA recombinant event in 100% (29 of 29) of those patients who had the Philadelphia chromosome.  To achieve this sensitivity, a battery of two bcr probes and three restriction enzymes is necessary.  The authors propose a sequential algorithm for efficient use of these probes and enzymes.  In 76% of the patients, bcr/abl rearrangement can be detected with a Bgl II digest and a 3' commercial probe.  An additional 21% of patients can be detected by a second assay in which the same membrane is rehybridized to a 3' and 5' combination bcr probe.  One patient (3%) required an additional restriction enzyme digest with BamH I to detect the recombinant event by the same 3' probe.  Karyotype analysis is used to determine cytogenetic remission in patients with CML under therapy.  The authors studied the use of DNA analysis by the Southern blot technique to detect a decrease in the relative number of leukemic cells.  By dilution studies and densitometric scanning of autoradiographs, the authors were able to detect a 15% decrease in the relative number of cells having the bcr/abl recombinant event.  The authors report the preliminary results of three patients in whom they compared the karyotype and recombinant DNA analysis at multiple time points in their clinical course.  In conclusion, the bcr/abl recombinant DNA analysis is superior to karyotype for the diagnosis of CML and can be used for monitoring treated patients.
The use of molecular probes to distinguish new primary tumors from recurrent tumors in gynecologic malignancies.  This is the first report using DNA molecular probe technology to distinguish between recurrent tumor and a second primary malignancy in a patient.  Tumor DNA was extracted from squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix at the time of radical hysterectomy.  Eighteen months later a squamous cell cancer was found in a vaginal apex biopsy from which DNA was extracted.  Tumor DNA from both lesions was subjected to restriction enzyme digestion and DNA molecular hybridization with human papillomavirus (HPV) probes.  Although both lesions were positive for HPV 16, their respective restriction enzyme patterns had different HPV genetic arrangements, thereby demonstrating their distinctness.
Thyroid carcinoma with mixed tall-cell and columnar-cell features.  Tall-cell and columnar-cell carcinomas have been regarded as aggressive variants of papillary thyroid carcinoma.  In the present case report the authors describe a composite tumor where these forms of differentiation coexisted, with transitional changes occurring within single follicular structures.  This finding indicates that the two variants are closely related.  In local recurrences, one or the other feature appeared in separate lesions.  Lung metastases developed, and the patient died 5 1/2 years after diagnosis and primary treatment.
A diagnostic expert system for colonic lesions.  The diagnostic expert system for colonic lesions (DESCL) was designed to discriminate colonic adenoma and adenocarcinoma from normal colonic tissue.  Although it was originally developed for use in conjunction with a machine vision analytic system, the DESCL has evolved into a teaching tool and a model for conceptual machine learning.  The expert system is table driven and consists of a shell and a knowledge base.  The latter comprises a series of architectural and cytologic observations and a quantitative estimate of diagnostic importance relating these observations to diagnostic outcome.  In a validation study of 100 colonic lesions, the expert system achieved a success rate of 98%.  It has the flexibility to allow individual pathologists to "customize" the knowledge base to suit their diagnostic criteria.
Estimation of PR and ER by immunocytochemistry in breast cancer. Comparison with radioligand binding methods.  Immunocytochemical assays for progesterone receptor (PR) using monoclonal antirabbit PR antibodies (PR-ICA) and for estrogen receptor (ER) (ER-ICA) were compared with radioligand binding (dextran-coated charcoal [DCC]) methods for receptor determination in patients with breast cancer.  Immunocytochemical staining for PR was exclusively nuclear in localization.  In this regard, PR staining is similar to previous findings for ER; PR-ICA showed a sensitivity of 89% and specificity of 100%.  ER-ICA was also 89% sensitive and similarly specific.  There was good correlation between the degree and intensity of staining and quantitative binding of radioligand.  Receptor-positive tumors, however, show considerable variation of immunocytochemical staining, suggesting heterogeneity of cellular PR content.  The availability of an immunocytochemical assay for PR increases the discriminatory potential for these methods of receptor determination.
Clinical significance of colonic fermentation.  Recent evidence of the potential benefits of short chain fatty acids has prompted renewed interest in the area of human colonic fermentation.  This paper reviews the clinical and metabolic consequences of colonic fermentation.
Endoscopic ultrasonography in staging rectal cancer.  Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) was used to stage rectal cancer by assessing depth of invasion through bowel wall layers and/or involvement of lymph nodes.  EUS findings were correlated with histopathologic findings to discern the usefulness of this modality in predicting which patients could be candidates for sphinctersaving procedures and the avoidance of abdominoperineal resection.  The Olympus EU-M3 endoscopic ultrasound system was used to assess depth of penetration through rectal wall layers and to identify lymph nodes.  Comparison of EUS findings to histopathologic findings was possible in 13 patients.  EUS agreed with histopathology in 9 of 13 cases (69.3%) ( p = 0.07, kappa statistic).  EUS agreed with histopathology as the presence or absence of lymph nodes in 9 of 13 cases (69.3%) (p = 0.07).  However, the presence of lymph nodes could not necessarily predict metastatic involvement of these nodes.  In one patient, invasion of vaginal cuff was correctly predicted.  In nine cases, computed tomographic analysis (CT) was available for comparison to EUS in detection of penetration beyond the bowel wall.  CT agreed with histopathology in 3 of 9 (33%), whereas EUS agreed with histopathology in 7 of 9 (78%).
Equal parental origin of chromosome 22 losses in human sporadic meningioma: no evidence for genomic imprinting.  Inactivation of tumor suppressor genes can occur either by mutation at the gene locus or by loss of part or all of the chromosome region containing the gene.  The latter is most frequently detected by DNA markers as loss of heterozygosity in the tumor tissue.  In several reports, the paternal homologue was preferentially retained in embryonal tumors associated with loss of particular chromosomal regions, suggesting genomic imprinting of the corresponding tumor suppressor loci.  To explore the generality of these findings and the possible role of genomic imprinting in adult tumors of the nervous system, we have determined the parental origin of chromosome 22 loss in sporadic meningioma.  Of nine cases studied, five tumors retained the maternally derived chromosome 22 homologue while four retained the paternally derived chromosome 22.  Thus, in contrast to the embryonal tumors, the meningioma locus on chromosome 22 is inactivated by random mutation in sporadic adult meningiomas.
The prognostic significance of CA 125 half-life in patients with ovarian cancer who have received primary chemotherapy after surgical cytoreduction.  Fifty-four patients with advanced epithelial ovarian cancer were monitored with serial serum CA 125 levels after surgical cytoreduction and during multi-agent chemotherapy with cisplatin-containing regimens.  CA 125 half-life of less than 20 days was associated with prolonged overall survival (p less than 0.015).  In those patients who eventually were found to be disease-free at surgical surveillance procedures, normalization of serum CA 125 levels to less than 35 U/ml within 65 days of primary operation also suggested an improved survival (p less than 0.059).
Suppression of serum insulin level by diazoxide does not alter serum testosterone or sex hormone-binding globulin levels in healthy, nonobese women.  Suppression of serum insulin levels with diazoxide is associated with a decrease in serum testosterone and an increase in serum sex hormone-binding globulin in obese women with the polycystic ovary syndrome.  To determine whether physiologic insulin levels play a regulatory role in the androgen status of nonobese women with normal menses, the androgen status of five nonobese normal women was assessed on two occasions: during a control study and after 10 days of oral diazoxide (100 mg, three times daily) administration.  Insulin release in response to 100 gm oral glucose administration decreased from 108.0 +/- 28.2 to 49.3 +/- 5.2 nmol.min/L (p = 0.05) after diazoxide administration.  However, despite suppression of insulin release, diazoxide administration did not affect serum total testosterone (diazoxide, 0.73 +/- 0.10; control, 0.69 +/- 0.11 nmol/L; p = NS) or sex hormone-binding globulin (diazoxide, 79.7 +/- 16.6; control, 70.2 +/- 12.6 nmol/L; p = NS) concentrations.  These observations suggest that physiologic insulin levels in nonobese healthy women do not regulate testosterone metabolism and that diazoxide does not exert a direct or independent effect on serum testosterone or sex hormone-binding globulin levels.
Autologous antibodies eluted from membrane fragments in human ovarian epithelial neoplastic effusions. III. Cytotoxic potential in vitro and characterization of antigen(s).  Cyst and ascites fluids from patients with ovarian epithelial neoplasms contain immunoglobulins with antitumor activity.  Autologous antibodies bound to the cellular membrane fragments obtained from human ovarian neoplastic effusions react with cell-surface antigens on different human ovarian cell lines, surgical specimens of human ovarian adenocarcinoma, and human ovarian tumors grown in athymic Balb/c mice.  The antibodies do not react with tissue preparations from normal human ovaries, other nonovarian normal or neoplastic tissues, and nonovarian human cell lines.  These studies indicate that these antibodies are capable of complement-mediated lysis of human ovarian tumor cell lines in vitro.  Preliminary characterization of the autologous ovarian tumor-associated antigen(s) indicates that it may be composed of three large-molecular-weight proteins of 182,000, 164,000, and 122,000 d.
Oral contraceptives and breast cancer.  Among women in general the risk of breast cancer through 59 years of age does not appear to be affected appreciably by the use of oral contraceptives.  Nonetheless, concern continues to be expressed about the effects of early age at first use, long-term duration of use, formulation, and a variety of other factors thought to influence breast cancer risk in the presence of oral contraception.  A number of recent studies restricted to young women suggest that long-term use may increase the risk of disease occurring very early, but the present lack of consistent findings in well-conducted epidemiologic studies prevents any certain conclusion with regard to cause-and-effect.  However, if an increased risk were indeed present, the most plausible interpretation is that long-term oral contraception promotes earlier clinical manifestation of breast cancer in some women while having no net impact on their lifetime risk of the disease.
Limbal autograft reconstruction after conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma.  Two patients who had squamous cell carcinoma with extensive limbal and corneal involvement were treated with surgery and cryotherapy.  Rarely large areas of the cornea are involved by this tumor.  Visual prognosis in such patients is poor.  In these two patients, autologous limbal transplants were effective in restoring an excellent corneal surface and good visual function.  This technique may be useful in the reconstruction of eyes with extensive neoplastic involvement of the corneoscleral limbus and cornea.
An immunohistochemical study of pi class glutathione S-transferase expression in normal human tissue.  Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs), a family of isoenzymes that play an important role in protecting cells from cytotoxic and carcinogenic agents, can be separated by biochemical and immunologic characteristics into three distinct classes named alpha, mu, and pi.  Previous studies have indicated that there is marked heterogeneity in the expression of different GST isoenzymes in different normal and malignant tissues.  To better understand the regulation of the human pi class glutathione S-transferase isoenzyme (GST-pi), the tissue distribution of this protein wa studied by an immunohistochemical technique using an anti-GST-pi polyclonal antibody in normal paraffin-embedded human tissues.  These studies indicate that there is a broad distribution of GST-pi in normal human tissues and establish a precise localization within the different organs studied.  GST-pi was expressed predominantly in normal epithelial cells of the urinary, digestive, and respiratory tracts, suggesting a possible role for GST-pi in detoxication and elimination of toxic substances.  Previous studies have indicated that GST-pi and the putative drug efflux pump P-glycoprotein are both overexpressed in multidrug-resistant human breast cancer cells and in xenobiotic resistant preneoplastic rat hyperplastic liver nodules.  Results from this study indicate that there are also similarities between the normal tissue distribution GST-pi and that previously reported for mammalian P-glycoprotein, particularly in secretory epithelia.  This finding suggests that these two gene products, which have been implicated in the development of resistance to cytotoxic drugs, may be coregulated in normal and malignant cells.
Decreased expression of integrin adhesive protein receptors in adenocarcinoma of the breast.  The integrin superfamily represents a major class of receptors mediating cell-substrate adhesion.  Our recent study of the tissue distribution of the alpha 2 beta 1 integrin, a cell-surface collagen receptor, revealed that high levels of receptor expression were associated with orderly, regulated epithelial cell proliferation.  Those observations prompted the present investigation of alpha 2 beta 1 and other integrins in adenocarcinoma of the breast.  The alpha 2 beta 1 integrin was highly expressed on the epithelium of the ducts and ductules of normal breast tissue.  Normal or nearly normal levels of the receptor were expressed in fibroadenomas.  In contrast, markedly decreased or undetectable alpha 2 beta 1 expression was typical of poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas.  Well-differentiated lesions exhibited intermediate levels of expression.  Similar, but less extensive, decreases in expression were observed for the alpha 5 beta 1 (fibronectin receptor) and alpha v beta 3 (vitronectin receptor).  Significant expression of the beta 1 subunit on even poorly differentiated tumors suggests that the expression of other undefined members of the beta 1 family is not reduced to the same low level as alpha 2 beta 1 and alpha 5 beta 1.  Expression of the alpha 2 beta 1 integrin was highly correlated with estrogen-receptor expression.  Decreased expression of alpha 2 beta 1 and other integrin adhesive protein receptors probably contributes to the altered adhesive properties of tumor cells characteristic of the malignant phenotype.
Lymph node metastasis from papillary-follicular thyroid carcinoma in young patients.  A total of 117 patients under 20 years of age with papillary and/or follicular thyroid cancer presented to the M.  D.  Anderson Cancer Center between 1949 and 1987.  The most common presenting symptom was a cervical mass.  Twenty percent of the patients had a history of prior irradiation.  Sixty percent initially had palpable lymph nodes, while 26% who had clinically negative examinations had pathologically positive lymph nodes.  Recurrence was highest in regional lymph nodes at 24%, with only a 4% recurrence rate at the primary site and a 3% recurrence rate at distant sites.  There were no deaths due to the thyroid cancer.  To maintain a low rate of recurrence, near-total thyroidectomy with neck dissection followed by iodine 131 treatment should be considered in these young patients.
Survival discriminants for differentiated thyroid cancer.  Since 1975, the American Cancer Society, Illinois Division, has published end results of major cancer sites drawn from patient data contributed voluntarily by hospital cancer registries throughout the state.  The current study was undertaken, in part, to apprehend information regarding contested areas in the management of patients having differentiated (papillary/follicular) thyroid cancer.  A total of 2,282 patients with either papillary or follicular carcinoma of the thyroid from 76 different Illinois hospitals and providing 10 years of follow-up information (life-table analysis) were retrospectively analyzed for demographic, disease, and treatment-related predictors of survival.  Multivariate analysis using the Cox proportional hazards method was made for stage, age, race, sex, morphology, history of radiation exposure, presence of positive lymph nodes, initial surgical treatment, postoperative iodine 131 therapy, and replacement/suppressive thyroid hormone treatment.  Statistically significant (p less than or equal to 0.05) predictors of favorable survival after thyroid cancer were low stage (I and II), young age (less than 50 years), white race, female sex, and the administration, postoperatively, of either thyroid hormone or radioactive iodine.  Factors that had no influence on survival were lymph node status, choice of initial surgical treatment, and a history of prior irradiation.  We suggest that where a prospective clinical trial is impracticable, a retrospective analysis of a large and detailed database, such as that available from cooperating hospital-based tumor registries, may yet provide useful insights to solutions of cancer management problems.
Soft tissue sarcomas of the head and neck in adults.  We reviewed the clinical records and pathologic material of 176 adults with primary soft tissue sarcomas treated at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center between 1950 and 1985.  Seventy-two patients (41%) had low-grade sarcomas and 104 (59%) had high-grade sarcomas.  All but 18 patients underwent some form of excision as initial therapy.  Adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy combined with surgical excision showed no significant effect.  A significantly increased risk of treatment failure was associated with large tumor size, positive surgical margins, bone involvement, local recurrence, metastatic spread, and high histologic grade.  Except for recurrence, the p value by univariate analysis in the log-rank test for comparison of survival according to these clinical and pathologic characteristics was p less than 0.0001.  Although the overall survival was 75% at 2 years, 55% at 5 years, and 46% at 10 years, only 20% of the patients with high-grade sarcomas were alive 10 years after treatment.  Most patients with rhabdomyosarcoma, high-grade peripheral nerve tumor, and high-grade fibrous histiocytoma and all patients with high-grade angiosarcoma died of disease less than 5 years after diagnosis.  New therapeutic strategies are needed to improve the survival of adult patients with high-grade soft tissue sarcomas of the head and neck.
Multimodality preoperative treatment for advanced stage IV (MO) cancer of the head and neck.  Sixty-three patients with advanced unresectable squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck were treated with a combination of chemotherapy, radiation, and surgery.  We observed a 75% response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.  The 5-year survival rate for all 63 patients was 20%, and only 3 patients were alive at 8 years.  The 5-year survival rate for patients who completed the treatment plan and received chemotherapy, radiation, and surgery was 43% compared with 20% for those who had chemotherapy and radiation but refused surgery.  Development of a second primary cancer was the cause of death in 62% of the patients who survived more than 24 months.
Significance of positive margins in oral cavity squamous carcinoma.  Three hundred ninety-eight consecutive, previously untreated patients undergoing surgery for epidermoid carcinoma of the oral cavity from 1979 to 1983 were reviewed.  One hundred twenty-nine patients were classified as having positive surgical margins.  Of these, 83 patients had tumor within 0.5 mm of the surgical margin, 9 had premalignant changes at the margin, 9 had in situ carcinoma at the margin, and 28 had invasive cancer at the margin.  The remaining 269 patients had uninvolved margins.  The significance of positive margins relating to survival, subsequent clinical course, local recurrence, and patterns of treatment failure was examined, along with the impact of adjuvant postoperative radiotherapy on positive margins.  The percentage of patients having positive margins progressively increased with increasing T stage: 21% in T1 versus 55% in T4 primary cancer.  The overall 5-year survival for patients with negative margins was 60%.  For patients with positive margins, 5-year survival was 52%.  This difference was statistically significant.  The incidence of local recurrence in patients having positive surgical margins was twice as much as in those with negative margins (36% versus 18%).  Metastasis rates in the neck and at distant sites were not significantly influenced by the status of the surgical margin.  Of the 129 patients with positive margins, 49 received postoperative radiotherapy.  In those patients so treated, a trend toward lower recurrence rates was noted.  Differences were not statistically significant.  This retrospective review confirms the importance of adequate resection of the primary tumor as well as the relative ineffectiveness of adjuvant postoperative radiotherapy in the improvement of local control in patients with positive surgical margins.
Flow cytometric evaluation of chemosensitive and chemoresistant head and neck tumors.  For patients with head and neck squamous carcinoma, a clinical response to induction chemotherapy has correlated with a survival advantage.  Similarly, patients with diploid tumors have displayed a survival advantage when compared with patients with aneuploid tumors.  This study examined DNA content in 33 patients who had undergone induction chemotherapy as part of two clinical protocols to determine if there was a correlation between the patients with diploid tumors and the patients with a clinical response to chemotherapy.  Although patients with stage III tumors had a longer disease-free survival than stage IV patients (p less than 0.0002), the addition of DNA content information did not improve the ability to predict response.  Specifically, there was no correlation between DNA content and the response to chemotherapy.  In addition, for this group of patients, a diploid DNA content was not correlated with a survival advantage.  We conclude that DNA content information did not add significantly to the prediction of clinical outcome in these patients who received induction chemotherapy.
Serologic determinants of survival in patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.  Specific circulating serum proteins may reflect unique properties governing the growth and progression of head and neck cancers.  One hundred three previously untreated patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck were prospectively evaluated for serum IgA, IgG, and IgM and C1q-binding macromolecules.  Immunoglobulins were assessed by the immunoturbidimetric technique.  C1q-binding macromolecules (C1qBM) were measured utilizing the iodine-125 assay of Zubler et al (J Immunol 1976; 116: 232-5).  Neither the level of serum immunoglobulins nor C1qBM values were correlated with the primary site, AJC (American Joint Committee on Cancer) stage of disease, or size of primary lesion.  Likewise, comparison of serum IgA with C1qBM values demonstrated that these laboratory parameters were independent variables (r = 0.15 by Pearson linear regression).  Univariate statistical analysis, utilizing the Cox proportional hazard model, showed serum IgA and C1qBM values to each contribute significantly to the ability to predict survival in patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (p = 0.01 and 0.003, respectively).  Furthermore, multivariate analysis reveals that both C1qBM and serum IgA levels contribute significantly to the hazards model beyond staging in predicting survival (p less than 0.001).  Predictive results were most apparent in patients with stage IV disease and related to the probability of both regional and distant metastatic recurrences.  Conversely, serologic analysis provided no information in patients who were staged early.  These results support pretreatment multiparametric serologic analysis of patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.
Delayed reconstruction following Mohs' chemosurgery for skin cancers of the head and neck.  The case records of 52 patients with 55 cutaneous neoplasms treated by Mohs' chemosurgery and subsequently reconstructed by plastic surgeons were reviewed to determine if delay between resection and reconstruction adversely affected the outcome of reconstruction.  Reconstruction was performed from 5 to 61 days after Mohs' chemosurgery for 45 basal cell carcinomas and 10 other cutaneous neoplasms.  There were no complications during the interval between resection and reconstruction.  Following reconstruction, minor wound complications occurred in 6% of patients; there were no major complications.  Microscopic examination of the re-excised wound revealed residual disease in 2 of 45 cases of basal cell carcinoma and 0 of 10 other cutaneous malignancies.  Both patients with residual basal cell carcinomas (i.e., false-negative margins after Mohs' surgery) had presented to the Mohs' surgeon with recurrent tumors.  During a follow-up period of 3 months to 3 years after complete resection, recurrent tumor developed in 2 of 45 cases of basal cell carcinoma and 3 of 8 cases of squamous cell carcinoma.  Delayed reconstruction, usually 5 to 20 days after Mohs' chemosurgery, can be performed without significant morbidity.  Re-excision of the Mohs' chemosurgical wound for pathologic examination can detect residual disease and may be especially indicated for large recurrent wounds.
Bactericidal effect of doxycycline associated with lysosomotropic agents on Coxiella burnetii in P388D1 cells.  There is no consistently reliable treatment for endocarditis resulting from chronic Coxiella burnetii infection, the causative agent of Q fever.  Although certain antibiotics are recommended on the basis of their in vitro bactericidal activities, results of therapy with these antibiotics are often disappointing.  To evaluate whether the currently recommended antibiotic susceptibility tests for C.  burnetii give misleading results because of continued division of uninfected cells, thereby resulting in the dilution of infected cells and, hence, a false picture of antibiotic efficacy, we blocked cell division during antibiotic susceptibility testing with cycloheximide.  Using this new method, we found that the currently recommended antibiotics for the treatment of Q fever, doxycycline, pefloxacin, and rifampin, did not reduce the ratio of infected to noninfected cells (either L929 or P388D1) by 9 days postinfection.  To test the hypothesis that this lack of antibacterial activity is due to antibiotic inactivation by the low pH of the phagolysosomes in which C.  burnetii is found, we used alkalinizing lysosomotropic agents (chloroquine or amantadine) concurrently with doxycycline.  This resulted in the sterilization of C.  burnetii infection in P388D1 cells.  This finding seems to confirm our suspicion that the acidic conditions of the phagolysosomes in which C.  burnetii is located inhibit antibiotic activity.  This inhibition can be reversed in vitro when lysosomotropic alkalinizing agents are used.
Histopathologic spectrum of clinically atypical melanocytic nevi. II. Studies of nonfamilial melanoma [published erratum appears in Arch Dermatol 1990 Dec;126(12):1616]  We studied the clinically most atypical pigmented lesion removed from each of 142 patients with newly diagnosed sporadic melanoma.  The specimens were categorized as to the type of nevus, ie, junctional or compound, presence of congenital features, and degree of nuclear atypicality--presence of nuclear enlargement, nuclear pleomorphism, hyperchromatism, and prominent nucleoli--of intraepidermal nevomelanocytes.  The frequency of nuclear abnormality was graded as 1 (rare cells), 2 (10% to 50% of cells), or 3 (greater than 50% of cells) for each nuclear parameter.  Among all lesions, 42 (29.6%) were junctional nevi, 74 (52.1%) were compound nevi, and 14 (9.9%) were dermal nevi.  Eighteen percent of the total were either dysplastic nevi (23 cases) or malignant melanoma in situ (three cases).  Fourteen nevi (9.9%) had congenital features.  There were 12 junctional and 39 compound nevi and one dermal nevus that exhibited nuclear abnormality, but only four junctional nevi compared with 19 compound nevi had sufficient atypia for a designation of dysplastic nevus.  Only two nevi with congenital features demonstrated any nuclear abnormality, and these were clearly nondysplastic.  Thus, among nevi surgically removed as the clinically most atypical lesion in this study, compound nevi were much more likely to demonstrate nuclear atypia (and dysplasia) than were other nevi, ie, junctional or dermal nevi, or nevi with congenital features.
Compound blue nevus: a variant of blue nevus with an additional junctional dendritic component. A clinical, histopathologic, and immunohistochemical study of six cases.  We studied six cases of heavily pigmented melanocytic lesions with features of blue nevi within the dermis, but with an additional junctional dendritic component.  This compound variant of blue nevus is an uncommon lesion that has not been previously identified as a distinct histologic entity.  Immunoperoxidase staining for S100 protein and counterstaining with azure B distinguished the presence of melanocytes among numerous melanophages within the dermis.  The compound variant of blue nevus can be distinguished histologically from combined blue nevus, pigmented spindle cell nevus, malignant melanoma, and melanosis due to a regressed malignant melanoma.  The six lesions were from three men and three women whose ages ranged from 11 to 51 years (mean, 31 years).  Three lesions were located on the trunk, two on the extremities, and one on the head.  After a mean follow-up period of 47 months (range, 38 to 58 months), there was no evidence of recurrence.
Surgical treatment of cardiac myxomas: long-term results.  Between 1965 and 1988, 22 patients underwent 24 operations for cardiac myxomas.  Two patients had the complex myxoma syndrome.  Mitral valve replacement was required at initial operation in 2 patients.  One patient died perioperatively, and 5 others died subsequently.  The 16 surviving patients recently underwent evaluation at a mean duration of 9 years after operation.  Ten are asymptomatic and 6 have New York Heart Association class II symptoms.  Nine patients continue to be employed.  Eleven are in sinus rhythm, 3 have permanent pacemakers, and 2 have chronic atrial arrhythmias.  Echocardiography showed atrioventricular valve insufficiency in 3 patients and reduced contractility in 4, but no new tumor recurrences.  The long-term prognosis of this relatively large group of patients with cardiac myxomas has been good.  Patients without the complex myxoma syndrome had no recurrence, whereas 2 patients did require reoperation for mitral valve replacement.  Long-term disability and chronic arrhythmias have been infrequent, and functional status and employability of these patients have been very good.
Left superior vena cava: a pitfall in computed tomographic diagnosis with surgical implications.  We report 2 cases in which computed tomography of the mediastinum demonstrated an abnormality originally misinterpreted as lymphadenopathy but subsequently shown to represent a left superior vena cava.  Misinterpretation may result in errors in optimum treatment and may complicate surgical exploration of the mediastinum.  These 2 cases are presented to remind radiologists and surgeons of the possibility of this unusual anatomy.
The technicon H6000 analyzer discriminates chronic lymphocytic leukemia from other B-cell leukemias through automatic assessment of large unstained cells.  The separation of chronic lymphocytic leukemia of B-cell origin from other chronic B-cell leukemias is subjective, being largely based on the morphologic features of the lymphoid cells in the peripheral blood.  The percentage of large unstained cells determined with a Technicon H6000 analyzer (an automated blood cell differential analyzer, Technicon Instruments Corp, Tarrytown, NY) was used as a cell volume variable in an investigation of 70 cases of chronic lymphocytic leukemia of B-cell origin and of other chronic B-cell leukemias.  The significant degree of correlation between the percentage of large unstained cells and morphoimmunophenotypic diagnosis, although obtained for a relatively small number of cases, suggests that this method of cell volume analysis can be used to improve diagnostic reproducibility in chronic B-cell leukemia.
Persistence of mucosal gastric carcinomas for 8 and 6 years in two patients.  A small gastric carcinoma was detected in a man, but he refused surgery.  Eight years later, he was readmitted for a check-up, and a partial gastrectomy was performed.  Pathologic examination revealed a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma restricted within the mucosa.  In another man, an irregularly shaped, grossly depressed lesion indicating a malignancy was present at the gastric angle, and 6 years later he agreed to a partial gastrectomy.  The lesion proved to be a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma confined to the mucosa.  Retrospective examination of the original biopsy specimen revealed a small area of adenocarcinoma, presumably overlooked at the initial examination.  Thus, some gastric carcinomas of the well-differentiated type can grow at an extremely slow rate, without extensive spread or invasion.  Findings in these cases contribute to knowledge of the biological behavior of gastric carcinomas.
Tumor of the atrioventricular nodal region. A clinical and immunohistochemical study.  Autopsy specimens of 17 tumors of the atrioventricular nodal region were studied.  Sudden death occurred in 14 children and adults; seven of these patients had a history of atrioventricular block or syncope.  Three tumors were incidental findings in infants with other congenital anomalies; diaphragmatic agenesis, pulmonary hypoplasia, and Meckel's diverticulum in one patient; mitral atresia in one; and congenital hydrocephalus, ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, coarctation of the aorta, and patent omphalovitelline duct in the third.  Immunohistochemical stains demonstrated strong positivity for carcinoembryonic antigen in 13 of 13 cases, B72.3 antigen in 5 of 7 cases, and cytokeratin in 11 of 11 cases.  Twenty control cases of mesothelioma and mesothelial hyperplasia were all negative for B72.3; one showed focal carcinoembryonic antigen staining.  Ultrastructural analysis of one case demonstrated short rudimentary microvilli not characteristic of mesothelial cells.  We conclude that so-called mesotheliomas of the atrioventricular nodal region are not of mesothelial origin, because of strong carcinoembryonic antigen positivity and occasional positivity with B72.3, as these antibodies react with glycoproteins found in endodermally derived tissue and generally not with mesothelial tissue.  Conduction system tumors are most likely congenital rests of endodermal origin, can be associated with other congenital anomalies, and often cause symptoms of heart block and sudden death.
A signet-ring cell carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater.  We describe a variant of carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater, which, to our knowledge, has not been previously described.  Classic signet-ring cells represented the predominant cell type, and were admixed with more poorly differentiated tumor cells that were chromogranin positive.  These findings raise the possibility of an amphicrine tumor of the ampulla.
The impact of microinvasion on axillary node metastases and survival in patients with intraductal breast cancer.  A rational approach to the local treatment of intraductal breast cancer continues to generate considerable debate.  However, the finding of an invasive component in intraductal breast cancer is widely regarded as an appropriate indication for axillary node dissection as part of the local treatment and staging of this disease.  Despite this view, the natural history of patients with intraductal breast cancer with foci of microinvasion is poorly defined.  Between 1965 and 1988, 41 patients with this pathologic finding of intraductal carcinoma with foci of microinvasion were seen at the UCLA Medical Center.  Twenty-three patients presented with mammographic abnormalities, while 17 patients presented with a palpable mass.  One patient presented with Paget's disease of the nipple.  Thirty-three patients underwent axillary node dissection as part of their local treatment.  No lymph node metastases were identified.  The median follow-up in 37 patients was 47 months.  There have been no local recurrences and no deaths from recurrent breast cancer.  Intraductal breast cancer associated with microinvasion appears to be an extremely favorable lesion with minimal risk of nodal metastases.
Autologous bone marrow transplantation in high-risk remission T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia using immunotoxins plus 4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide for marrow purging.  Fourteen patients with high-risk T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in complete remission underwent autologous bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in an attempt to eradicate their residual disease burden.  A combined immunochemotherapy protocol using a cocktail of two immunotoxins directed against CD5/Tp67 and CD7/Tp41 T-lineage differentiation antigens in combination with the in vitro active cyclophosphamide congener 4-hydroperoxy-cyclophosphamide (4-HC) was used to purge autografts.  Despite high dose pretransplant radiochemotherapy and effective purging of autografts, 9 of 14 patients relapsed at a median of 2.5 months (range, 1.2 to 16.8 months) post BMT.  Two patients remain alive and disease free at 26 and 28 months post BMT.  We used a novel quantitative minimal residual disease (MRD) detection assay, which combines fluorescence activated multiparameter flow cytometry and cell sorting with leukemic progenitor cell (LPC) assays, to analyze remission bone marrow (BM) samples from T-lineage ALL patients for the presence of residual LPCs.  Notably, high numbers of residual LPC detected in remission BM before BMT constituted a poor prognostic indicator, providing the first evidence for the biologic significance and clinical value of in vitro T-lineage ALL LPC assays.  The median value for the residual leukemia burden before BMT, was approximately 8.6 x 10(3) LPC/10(8) mononuclear cells (MNC) (approximately 0.0086% LPC).  Patients with a residual leukemia burden less than this median value appeared to have a better outlook for remaining free of relapse after autologous BMT than patients with a greater leukemia burden (53 +/- 25% v 14 +/- 13%, P = .006, Mantel-Cox).  By comparison, the log kill efficacy of purging, the remaining numbers of LPC in purged autografts, or the estimated numbers of reinfused LPC, did not correlate with the probability of disease-free survival (DFS).  These results indicate that the primary reason for the recurrence of leukemia was inefficient pretransplant radiochemotherapy rather than inefficient purging of autografts.
Human basophils express interleukin-4 receptors.  Interleukin-4 (IL-4), a multipotential lymphokine reputed to play an important role in the regulation of immune responses, interacts with a variety of hemopoietic target cells through specific cell surface membrane receptors.  The present study was designed to investigate whether human basophils express IL-4 binding sites.  For this purpose, basophils were enriched to homogeneity (93% and 98% purity, respectively) from the peripheral blood of two chronic granulocytic leukemia (CGL) donors using a cocktail of monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) and complement.  Purified basophils bound 125I-radiolabeled recombinant human (rh) IL-4 in a specific manner.  Quantitative binding studies and Scatchard plot analysis revealed the presence of a single class of high affinity IL-4 binding sites (280 +/- 40 sites per cell in donor 1 and 640 +/- 45 sites per cell in donor 2) with an apparent dissociation constant, kd, of 7.12 x 10(-11) +/- 2.29 x 10(-11) and 9.55 +/- 3.5 x 10(-11) mol/L, respectively.  KU812-F, a human basophil precursor cell line, was found to express a single class of 810 to 1,500 high affinity IL-4 binding sites with a kd of 2.63 to 5.54 x 10(-10) mol/L.  No change in the numbers or binding constants of IL-4 receptors was found after exposure of KU812-F cells to rhIL-3 (a potent activator of basophils) for 60 minutes.  No effect of rhIL-4 on 3H-thymidine uptake, release or synthesis of histamine, or expression of basophil differentiation antigens (Bsp-1, CD11b, CD25, CD40, CD54) on primary human CGL basophils or KU812-F cells was observed.
Developmental regulation of granulocytic cell binding to hemonectin.  Hemonectin (HN), a component of the bone marrow (BM) extracellular matrix which promotes adhesion of cells in the granulocytic lineage, was purified to near homogeneity and tested for its ability to mediate attachment of normal and leukemic cells of granulocytic lineage.  Purified HN immobilized on plastic substrates promoted serum-free attachment of normal granulocyte/macrophage progenitor cells (CFC-GM), using an in situ attachment assay in which cell attachment is inhibited by specific polyclonal antisera.  When unfractionated BM cells were allowed to attach to purified HN and stained in situ, HN preferentially bound cells at earlier stages of granulocytic differentiation.  These observations were confirmed using cells of the HL-60 progranulocytic cell line which mirrored this differentiation-stage specific binding to HN.  HN promoted attachment of 60% of uninduced HL-60 cells which were arrested at the progranulocyte stage, whereas only 15% of uninduced HL-60 cells attached to uncoated plastic and 4% to attached plastic coated with equal microgram quantities of bovine serum albumin (BSA).  When HL-60 cells were induced to differentiate along the granulocytic pathway by incubation with dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), attachment to hemonectin was reduced.  Thus, both primary BM granulocytic cells and a granulocytic cell line show preferential attachment of those cells at earlier stages of differentiation.  This developmentally regulated binding suggests a mechanism for release of maturing BM into the peripheral circulation.
Human macrophage colony-stimulating factor induces macrophage colonies after L-phenylalanine methylester treatment of human marrow.  Macrophage-colony stimulating factor (M-CSF) has well-known effects on murine bone marrow, but its colony stimulating activity for human bone marrow is controversial.  After treatment of human bone marrow with L-phenylalanine methylester (PME), macrophage-colonies (CFU-M) were induced by M-CSF in a dose-dependent fashion.  The optimal concentration of recombinant human-macrophage colony stimulating factor (rhM-CSF) was 1,000 U/mL.  Purified human urine M-CSF had colony stimulating activity similar to rhM-CSF.  Further studies were performed to determine the factors responsible for the enhanced CFU-M formation from PME treated marrow.  Compared with nylon wool and carbonyl iron monocyte depletion methods, PME eliminated significantly more monocytes and myeloid cells.  This observation suggested that these cells may release hematopoietic inhibitory factors for CFU-M.  Low concentrations (1%) but not normal (10%) concentrations of blood monocytes were inhibitory (mean inhibition, 48%) to CFU-M.  High concentrations of monocytes (50%) augmented CFU-M colonies.  HL-60 conditioned media was used to simulate secretory products of early myeloid cells.  HL-60 conditioned media (1%) inhibited CFU-M formation but not granulocyte macrophage or granulocyte colonies.  We conclude that M-CSF has colony stimulating activity for human marrow that can be recognized after removal of inhibitory cells by PME treatment.
New type of Bcr/Abl junction in Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia.  A new and rare type of Bcr/Abl junction between exon C3 of the 3' portion of the Bcr gene and Abl exon 2 has been identified in the leukemic cells of two Ph1-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia patients in chronic phase.  This is the fourth type of Bcr/Abl junction so far identified in Ph1-positive hematologic malignancies and is a consequence of an unusual breakpoint position on chromosome 22 that falls approximately 20 kb downstream of the major breakpoint cluster region (bcr) of the Bcr gene.  The new hybrid mRNA is 540 base pairs (bp) longer than that expressed by the K562 cell line and could codify for a Bcr/Abl protein carrying 180 additional aminoacids with respect to the larger P210 protein so far identified.  The hematologic phenotype expressed by the two patients carrying this unusual type of Bcr/Abl rearrangement does not significantly differ from that commonly seen in chronic myelogenous leukemia.
Autologous bone marrow transplantation in multiple myeloma: identification of prognostic factors.  Multiple myeloma remains a universally fatal malignancy with a median survival time not exceeding 3 years.  A clinical trial was undertaken to determine feasibility and efficacy of marrow-ablative chemoradiotherapy supported by unpurged autologous bone marrow (ABMT) and to define prognostic variables.  Total body irradiation and either melphalan or thiotepa were administered to 55 patients (median age 53 years; range 20 to 66 years).  The group of 21 patients with resistance to standard melphalan-prednisone and to continuous infusions of vincristine and Adriamycin with high dose dexamethasone (VAD) included 7 with primary unresponsive disease and 14 with resistant relapse; among the 34 patients achieving remission with the VAD regimen, 14 were in first and 20 in a subsequent remission.  Marked cytoreduction by greater than or equal to 75% was observed among all 21 patients with refractory myeloma, whereas further cytoreduction of this magnitude was noted in only 56% of the 34 patients already in remission after VAD.  Five of the 6 early deaths among all 55 patients occurred in the 14 patients with resistant relapse, none of whom achieved complete remission and who, as a group, had median durations of relapse-free and overall survival of only 8 and 7 months, respectively.  Among the 41 remaining patients, there was only one early death, and 27% achieved complete remission including a 36% incidence among the 14 patients treated in first remission; their projected 4-year survival rate was 82% regardless of their disease status (first or later remission or primary resistance).  When information about sensitivity to prior therapy is unavailable, the presence before ABMT of both high beta-2-microglobulin levels (greater than 3 mg/L) and non-IgG isotype helped identify 9 among the 55 patients with a very poor prognosis: all 8 responders relapsed within 9 months, and 8 patients died within 15 months.  By contrast, a 4-year projected survival rate of over 70% for the other patients (about 80% of this series) justifies further investigation of this novel treatment approach in comparison with standard dose regimens.  Our results indicate that marrow-ablative therapy cannot be recommended for myeloma patients with resistant relapse or those with a combination of risk factors (advanced tumor burden, absence of IgG isotype).  The apparent lack of an adverse effect of even marked plasmacytosis in autografts (up to 30%) emphasizes the need for better cytoreduction rather than bone marrow purging.
Induction of donor-type chimerism in murine recipients of bone marrow allografts by different radiation regimens currently used in treatment of leukemia patients.  Three radiation protocols currently used in treatment of leukemia patients before bone marrow transplantation (BMT) were investigated in a murine model (C57BL/6----C3H/HeJ) for BM allograft rejection.  These include (a) a single dose of total body irradiation (8.5 Gy TBI delivered at a dose rate of 0.2 Gy/min), (b) fractionated TBI (12 Gy administered in six fractions, 2 Gy twice a day in 3 days, delivered at a dose rate of 0.1 Gy/min, and (c) hyperfractionated TBI (14.4 Gy administered in 12 fractions, 1.2 Gy three times a day in 3 days, delivered at a dose rate of 0.1 Gy/min).  Donor-type chimerism 6 to 8 weeks after BMT and hematologic reconstitution on day 12 after BMT found in these groups were compared with results obtained in mice conditioned with 8 Gy TBI delivered at a dose rate of 0.67 Gy/min, routinely used in this murine model.  The results in both parameters showed a marked advantage for the single dose 8.5 Gy TBI over all the other treatments.  This advantage was found to be equivalent to three- to fourfold increment in the BM inoculum when compared with hyperfractionated radiation, which afforded the least favorable conditions for development of donor-type chimerism.  The fractionated radiation protocol was equivalent in its efficacy to results obtained in mice irradiated by single-dose 8 Gy TBI, both of which afforded a smaller but not significant advantage over the hyperfractionated protocol.  This model was also used to test the effect of radiation dose rate on the development of donor-type chimerism.  A significant enhancement was found after an increase in dose rate from 0.1 to 0.7 Gy/min.  Further enhancement could be achieved when the dose rate was increased to 1.3 Gy/min, but survival at this high dose rate was reduced.  These results demonstrated indirectly that dose rate affects the expression of host-type pluripotent stem cells, the progeny of which appear 3 to 6 weeks after treatment with 8 Gy TBI delivered at a dose rate of 0.1 Gy/min, but which are eradicated if radiation is delivered at a dose rate of 1.3 Gy/min.
Contamination of peripheral blood stem cell harvests by circulating neuroblastoma cells.  Peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC) are being used as one alternative to autologous marrow rescue for patients with neuroblastoma and other solid malignancies.  Some physicians prefer use of PBSC because less risk of tumor contamination is believed to exist.  This hypothesis was evaluated by immunocytologic analysis of blood samples and concurrently drawn bone marrow (BM) samples and of PBSC harvests obtained from 31 patients with disseminated neuroblastoma.  We found circulating neoplastic cells in 75% of specimens analyzed at diagnosis, in 36% during therapy, and in 14% of PBSC harvests.  Tumor cells in blood obtained during therapy did not appear until 3 months after the time of diagnosis.  Clearance of circulating neuroblastoma cells was documented after two courses of induction chemotherapy.  Six of 13 patients with minimal or no BM disease had positive blood specimens.  We conclude that substantial risk of tumor contamination of PB harvests exists and recommend that induction chemotherapy be administered before hematopoietic progenitor cells are collected from blood.
Premorphological metabolic changes in human breast carcinogenesis.  Malignant breast tissue is characterized by morphological and metabolic changes when compared with normal breast tissue.  In this study, the cytochemical measurement of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) activity was used to detect abnormal metabolism in breast tissue and to determine whether abnormal metabolic activity precedes morphological change during human breast carcinogenesis.  Normal and benign breast tissue, morphologically normal tissue from cancer-containing breasts, and malignant breast tissue were studied.  In malignant tissue, mean(s.e.m.) G6PD activity was significantly increased when compared with normal and benign tissue (9.69(2.3) versus 27.02(1.7) mean integrated extinction (MIE) x 100, P less than 0.01).  G6PD activity was increased in morphologically normal tissue from cancer-containing breasts when compared with normal and benign breast tissue from breasts with no known cancer (27.02(1.7) versus 18.42(2.6) MIE x 100, P less than 0.05).  These findings suggest that metabolic abnormalities precede morphological changes in breast carcinogenesis.  Abnormal metabolism can be detected widely within a cancer-containing breast.  The detection of such abnormality may prove helpful in identifying patients at high risk of developing breast cancer.
Endoscopic screening of early esophageal cancer with the Lugol dye method in patients with head and neck cancers.  The poor prognosis for esophageal cancer could be improved if lesions were detected at an early stage.  To detect early esophageal cancer, endoscopic screening of the esophagus with the Lugol dye method was performed in patients with head and neck cancers who were asymptomatic but regarded as being at high risk for synchronous or metachronous esophageal cancer.  Of 178 patients screened, 9 had esophageal cancer (5.1%).  Eight of these patients (89%) were at early stages with no lymph node metastasis.  Most of the lesions (9 of 13 lesions) were not detectable by barium studies or ordinary endoscopic study.  The epidemiologic statistical analysis of the patients confirmed that they had a significantly high observed and expected number (O/E) ratio (39.7; P less than 0.001).  These results demonstrate the value of endoscopic screening of the esophagus with the Lugol dye method in patients with head and neck cancers and imply that endoscopic screening with the Lugol dye method may be useful for detecting early esophageal cancer in individuals at risk for other causes.
Surgical treatment of brain metastases in malignant melanoma.  The authors report the results of a retrospective review of 13 patients who underwent 19 craniotomies for resection of metastatic malignant melanoma at the University of Colorado (Denver, CO) between 1983 and 1989.  There was preoperative evidence of extracranial disease in 11 patients.  Eight patients had more than one intracranial metastasis at operation.  Intraoperative ultrasound was used in 18 of the 19 craniotomies to minimize surgical trauma to the brain.  The 30-day mortality was zero.  The 30-day morbidity was minimal.  No patient acquired a new neurologic deficit as a result of surgery.  All patients regained at least their preoperative level of functioning.  Six of the patients who were living at the time of review have been followed for 4 to 25 months (median, 7.5 months).  The seven patients who were dead at the time of review survived 4 to 18 months (median, 10 months).  These results compare favorably with the survival of untreated patients with metastatic melanoma to the brain (median, 1 month), patients treated with radiation therapy alone (median, 2-4 months), and those treated with chemotherapy alone (median, 2-4 months).  The excision of metastatic melanoma from the brain, although not curative, may increase survival in patients with this problem with little morbidity and mortality even in the presence of other metastases.
Loss of expression of blood group antigen H is associated with cellular invasion and spread of oral squamous cell carcinomas.  Membrane-bound carbohydrates may influence the metastatic behavior of cancer cells.  Forty-two squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) of the buccal and maxillary alveolar mucosa were studied retrospectively using a monoclonal antibody (BE2) that reacts with blood group H (type 2 chain) structure and an immunoperoxidase (avidin-biotin peroxidase complex) staining technique.  H-antigen staining within the entire tumor did not correlate with the stage of the tumor, i.e., tumor spread.  However, loss of staining within the most invasive sites of the tumors correlated significantly with the stage of tumor development and histologic grade of malignancy.  These findings support the view that features regarding the cells of deeper parts of the carcinomas are very important for the clinical behavior of the tumors and that loss of H-antigen expression is related to the stage of the tumor and invasion of carcinoma cells.
Occurrence of beta-hexachlorocyclohexane in breast cancer patients.  The residues of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) and neutral organochlorine compounds in breast fat of 44 breast cancer patients and 33 women free of cancer were determined.  No statistically significant differences appeared between the two comparison groups with regard to occurrence of PAH compounds.  Of the neutral organochlorine compounds, residues of beta-hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH) were found more frequently in breast cancer patients.  After adjusting for age and parity by stepwise logistic regression, beta-HCH remained a significant risk factor of breast cancer.  Using a cutoff point for the residue level of beta-HCH in breast adipose tissue of more than 0.1 mg/kg fat, the odds ratio was 10.51 (95% CI, 2.00-55.26).
Cell lineage markers in human pancreatic cancer.  The normal pancreas consists of three major cell types or lineages that share a common embryologic origin from pluripotent endodermal precursors.  The type of cell that undergoes neoplastic transformation to form a pancreatic carcinoma is controversial and may influence the phenotype and biologic behavior of the tumor.  In this study, immunohistologic techniques were used to determine the cell lineage differentiation expressed in 29 primary exocrine pancreatic adenocarcinomas, five metastatic exocrine pancreatic adenocarcinomas, and five islet cell neoplasma.  Specimens of normal pancreas and chronic pancreatitis were used for comparison.  The cell lineage markers consisted of monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies against trypsin and lipase (acinar cells); secretory component, carbonic anhydrase II, and pancreatic cancer mucin SPan-1 (ductal cells); and chromogranin-A and somatostatin (islet cells).  The expression of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and lysozyme were also determined.  This collection of markers allowed the differentiation between acinar, ductal, and islet cells of normal pancreas and chronic pancreatitis specimens.  The expression of cell lineage markers in islet cell tumors was homogeneous and restricted to chromogranin-A.  In contrast, the expression of these markers in primary and metastatic exocrine pancreatic adenocarcinomas was variable.  Reactivity with monoclonal anti-CEA was absent in normal pancreas, and was present in 83% of chronic pancreatitis specimens as well as 90% of exocrine pancreatic adenocarcinomas.  In addition, lysozyme reactivity was absent in normal pancreas; however, lysozyme was expressed in one case of chronic pancreatitis, 17 cases of primary carcinoma, and three cases of metastatic carcinoma.  These findings support the concept that the original transformed cell type in many pancreatic exocrine carcinomas resemble endodermal "stem cells" that retain the capability of differentiation along more than one cell lineage pathway.
Expression of pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor gene in human colorectal tumor.  Expression of pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor (PSTI) gene was examined by Northern blotting analyses in 31 human colorectal tumors that included two benign adenomas and 26 adenocarcinomas.  Among the total of 28 cases which proved to be adequate for mRNA analyses, all but one showed the expression of PSTI at various levels.  In contrast, PSTI expression was not detected in two malignant lymphomas of the rectum.  The level of PSTI expression was not correlated with the patient's age, sex, tumor location or size, stage of differentiation, lymph node metastasis, or progression stage.  Some colorectal adenocarcinomas were also shown to express genes that can hybridize with human trypsinogen cDNA probe.  It looks as though in these tumors, a protease(s) and its inhibitor are produced simultaneously as part of a cellular self-defense mechanism.
The physical state of human papillomavirus 16 DNA in cervical carcinoma and cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.  Cervical carcinomas and cervical intraepithelial neoplasias (CIN) were analyzed for the presence of human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA using Southern blot hybridization.  Of the five HPV types examined (HPV types 6, 11, 16, 18, and 33), HPV 16 DNA was detected most frequently.  In most HPV 16-positive carcinomas examined, HPV 16 DNA was present in an integrated state in cellular DNA with or without the coexistence of episomal species.  In one case, however, only episomal species were detected.  Among seven cases of HPV 16-positive CIN, four contained HPV 16 DNA only in the episomal state and the rest contained HPV 16 DNA only in the integrated state, but the coexistence of both states was not found.  These results suggest that the integration of HPV 16 DNA is not necessary for cells to become malignant, although it is frequently associated with malignant cells.
Distribution of immunoglobulins and secretory component in gastric cancer of the aged.  The secretory immune system plays an important role in the local humoral immunity of the gastrointestinal tract.  In order to evaluate humoral immunity in gastric cancer, distribution of immunoglobulins (Ig) and secretory component was immunohistochemically studied in 74 early and 15 advanced primary gastric cancers.  In non-cancerous gastric mucosa, IgA and IgM, and secretory component were mainly identified in the cytoplasm of the intestinal metaplasia.  In early gastric cancer of well-differentiated type, the localization of IgA and IgM, and secretory component was similar to that of intestinal metaplasia.  In advanced gastric cancer, they were faintly observed and showed low positivity.  The number of Ig-containing cells infiltrating cancerous stroma was enumerated.  Immunoglobulin A-containing cells were dominant in the stroma of early gastric cancer.  On the other hand, there were few Ig-containing cells in the stroma of advanced gastric cancer, and the number of IgA-containing and IgM-containing cells was also decreased.  These results suggest that local humoral immunity is suppressed in gastric cancer, especially in advanced gastric cancer.
Giant cell tumor of bone. A clinicopathologic and DNA flow cytometric analysis.  Flow cytometric DNA analysis was performed on 60 cases of giant cell tumor of bone and the results were correlated with the clinicopathologic features.  Tumors studied were from 31 men and 29 women whose ages ranged from 18 to 62 years (median, 29 years).  The most common sites were the distal end of the femur and proximal end of the tibia, accounting for 75% of the lesions.  Treatment consisted of resection in 29 patients (48%), curettage with bone chip packing in 15 patients (25%), or curettage with cement packing in 16 patients (27%).  Ten patients (17%) had local relapse within 1 to 3 years, and two had lung metastases.  Forty-two patients (70%) exhibited tumors with a diploid DNA content, 16 aneuploid (27%), and two tetraploid (3%).  Six (37.5%) of the aneuploid patients had relapses: one of those had been treated by resection of the tumor and five by curettage.  Of the remaining ten (62.5%) unrelapsed aneuploid patients, nine had been treated by resection of the tumor and one by curettage.  Four of the 42 diploid patients (9.5%) had relapses; all had been treated by curettage of the tumor.  The two tetraploid tumors were treated by resection and none relapsed.  Histologic parameters did not correlate with relapse rate or DNA pattern.  Although relapse was more common among aneuploid tumors, our study shows that this appears to be influenced by the treatment modality rather than the ploidy status.  Based on this study the DNA analysis of giant cell tumor of bone has a limited utility for predicting the tumor's biologic behavior.
Hyperthermia alone in the treatment of recurrences of malignant tumors. Experience with 60 lesions.  Localized hyperthermia alone has been used for the treatment of cancer recurrences in which previous conventional therapies have failed.  Since 1983 and 1988, 57 patients with 60 lesions have been heated by means of a microwave and radiofrequency system.  Treatment protocol provided 45 minutes of heating at the intratumor temperature of at least 42 degrees C, twice a week, for a total number of six, eight, or ten heating sessions.  Invasive intratumor thermometry was performed for all lesions.  Complete response (CR) was obtained in ten cases (16.6%) and partial response (PR) in 14 (23.4%).  Higher rates of CR were observed in the chest wall (38.5%) compared with the head and neck area (11.4%), trunk (10%), and limbs (none).  Adenocarcinoma was the most responsive histologic type (40%).  Squamous cells carcinoma had 7.7% CR.  The only case of undifferentiated carcinoma showed CR; there were none on five sarcomas.  Long-term local control (24 months) was approximately 7%.  The multivariate analysis showed the statistical significance of the histologic variety (adenocarcinoma versus others, P less than 0.0001).  Side effects and complications of the treatment were minimal.
Clear cell adenocarcinoma of the lower genital tract. Correlation of mother's recall of diethylstilbestrol history with obstetrical records.  The written obstetric records of maternal exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES) were used as a criterion standard and compared with the DES exposure history recalled by mothers of women with vaginal, cervical, or indeterminable vaginal/exocervical clear cell adenocarcinoma.  Among cervical cases, the sensitivity of maternal recall was 50% (N = 2), and its specificity was 100%.  Among vaginal and vaginal/exocervical cases, this sensitivity was 72%; specificity was 60%; and the majority of these mothers who said they did not take DES were DES positive by written records.  Thus investigators should avoid using maternal recall alone to measure DES exposure.  Among subjects for whom written maternal obstetric records were available, 88% of vaginal cases and 46% of cervical cases were DES positive.  The authors conclude that few cases of vaginal clear cell adenocarcinoma should occur in young women as the cohort of women exposed in utero to DES continues to age, whereas cases of cervical origin may continue to occur.
Multiple spinal metastases from paraganglioma.  Isolated vertebral body metastases from paraganglioma are exceedingly rare.  They have been reported to occur in the presence of active primary tumor in the neck, local recurrence, or widespread metastases.  A unique case of carotid body tumor (paraganglioma) is reported with the following features: (1) multiple vertebral body metastases (C6, T9, and L3) presenting with spinal cord compression, and no evidence of local recurrence or other metastatic disease; (2) absence of mitoses on the original specimen or the metastatic deposit; and (3) a prolonged interval (9 years) to the development of symptomatic metastases.
Cancer in the families of children with soft tissue sarcoma.  The cancer experience among 754 first-degree relatives (mothers, fathers, and siblings) of a population-based series of 177 children with soft tissue sarcoma is reported.  The current study represents an extension of our earlier work in which the authors found an excess of breast cancer in the mothers of 143 of these children.  There were 40 cancers among all first-degree relatives, compared with 24.82 expected (relative risk [RR] 1.61, P = 0.006).  There was no excess in fathers, but an excess of borderline significance was seen in mothers (RR 1.67, P = 0.0545), and a significant excess in siblings (RR 4.55, P = 0.0002), mainly due to carcinoma of the breast and pediatric tumors.  Results of a step forward Cox multivariate analysis identified three variables in the index child which were independently associated with high cancer risk in relatives, as follows: age younger than 24 months at diagnosis; histologic type, embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma or other and unspecified soft tissue sarcoma; and male sex.  It was possible, therefore, to identify a subgroup of children whose relatives are at high risk of early onset cancer (RR in this group 10.14).  The pattern of cancers is consistent with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome.  The authors conclude that a marked proportion of childhood soft tissue sarcoma has a genetic basis.
Cholecystectomy and right colon cancer in Puerto Rico.  A case-control study was undertaken to evaluate the possible relationship between cholecystectomy and right colon cancer.  Two hundred patients with adenocarcinoma of the cecum or ascending colon (diagnosed between 1984 and 1989) were compared with 200 matched neighborhood controls.  Cholecystectomy history was obtained through interviews using structured questionnaires and subsequently validated from hospital records.  A statistically significant association (odds ratio = 2.14) was found between right colon cancer and a history of prior cholecystectomy.  The altered bile metabolism which occurs after removal of the gallbladder may have a carcinogenic effect on the right colon.  Dietary habits of the colon cancer patients in our study were consistent with prior reports in the literature, showing that this group has a lower intake of vegetables and cereal fiber than the control population.
Concomitant cisplatin chemotherapy and radiotherapy in advanced mucosal squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Long-term results of the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group study 81-17.  One hundred twenty-four eligible patients with advanced mucosal squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck were entered into a pilot study of concomitant cisplatin (100 mg/m2 given every 3 weeks for three doses) and standard irradiation.  The initial complete response (CR) was 71% with an additional two cases salvaged by surgery for an overall 73% CR.  When no keratin was identified in the histologic specimen (41 patients) the CR was 90%.  The nasopharynx showed the best CR (89%) among the sites.  At 4 years after treatment, the estimated locoregional tumor control rate was 43% and the survival, 34%.  When no keratin was present in the specimen, the estimated locoregional control of tumor was superior (56% versus 38% with keratin identified, P = 0.02) and the estimated survival was also superior (48% versus 26%, P = 0.008).  Acute treatment-related toxicities included one death due to renal damage and two patients with life-threatening renal damage.  The delivery of radiotherapy was not altered.  Late toxicity included necrosis -3%, fibrosis -4%, and one fistula.  The results of this study justify a randomized trial for the comparison of this combination of cisplatin and radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone in advanced mucosal carcinomas of the head and neck.
Final report of the French multicenter phase II study of the nitrosourea fotemustine in 153 evaluable patients with disseminated malignant melanoma including patients with cerebral metastases.  One hundred sixty-nine patients with histologic evidence of disseminated malignant melanoma, including patients with cerebral metastases, were entered into a Phase II study of the nitrosourea fotemustine.  The treatment regimen consisted of a 100 mg/m2 1 hour IV infusion every week for 3 consecutive weeks, followed by a 4- to 5-week rest period (induction therapy).  In responding or stabilized patients, maintenance therapy consisted of 100 mg/m2 every 3 weeks until the disease progressed.  One hundred fifty-three patients were evaluable for response.  Three complete responses and 34 partial responses were observed (according to the World Health Organization criteria), leading to an objective response rate of 24.2% (95% confidence interval: 17.4% to 31.0%).  Responses were also documented on cerebral (25.0%), visceral (19.2%), or nonvisceral (31.8%) metastatic sites.  The median duration of response was 22 weeks (range, 7 to 80 weeks).  The objective response rate in previously untreated patients was 30.7% (19 of 62 patients).  The main toxicity was hematologic with delayed and reversible leukopenia and/or thrombopenia.  The objective response rate observed (especially in untreated patients), the activity on cerebral metastases, and the small amount of extra-hematologic toxicity encountered suggest that fotemustine is an effective drug in disseminated malignant melanoma.
Treatment of advanced neuroblastoma with emphasis on intensive induction chemotherapy. A report from the Study Group of Japan.  One hundred nine newly treated patients with advanced neuroblastoma were entered in this study between January 1985 and May 1989.  The eligible patients included infants younger than 12 months of age with Stage IVA disease (bone cortex, distant lymph node, and/or remote organ metastases) and patients aged 12 months or older with Stage III or IV disease (IVA plus IVB with tumor crossing the mid-line and with metastases confined to bone marrow, liver, and skin).  The patients first received six cyclic course of intensive chemotherapy (regimen A1), consisting of cyclophosphamide (1200 mg/m2), vincristine (1.5 mg/m2), tetrahydropyranyl adriamycin (pyrarubicin; 40 mg/m2), and cisplatin (90 mg/m2).  Original tumors and the regional lymph node metastases were removed some time during these first six cycles of chemotherapy.  The patients were further divided into three groups.  Patients in course 1 received alternating treatment by regimen B (cyclophosphamide and ACNU) and intensified regimen A1, and those in course 2 were treated with alternating administration of regimen C (cyclophosphamide and DTIC) and intensified A1.  Patients in course 3 were treated with bone marrow transplantation (BMT) preceded by high-dose preconditioning chemotherapy.  Survival rates were 77% in Stage III and 54% in Stage IV at 2 years, and 70% in Stage III and 45% in Stage IV at 3 years.  The major toxicities encountered were bone marrow suppression with leukocyte counts down to 100/mm3, mild cystitis, and hearing impairment.  The 2-year survival rate was 78% in 21 patients who underwent BMT when complete remission was achieved.  We concluded that our intensive induction chemotherapy is of significant value in increasing the rate of complete response, and in widening the indications for and achieving improved results of treatment with BMT.
Impaired production of tumor necrosis factor in breast cancer.  Spontaneous and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced production of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) by peripheral blood macrophages was investigated in breast cancer.  Whereas spontaneous TNF production by macrophages derived from patients with breast cancer was comparable with the one found in healthy controls (P greater than 0.1), LPS-stimulated macrophages derived from patients in the disease-free interval as well as with metastatic breast cancer were found to produce significantly lower amounts of TNF, as compared with macrophages derived from healthy control individuals (P less than 0.0005).  However, the production of TNF did not significantly differ between the two patient populations (P greater than 0.05).  The impairment of LPS-induced TNF production did not depend upon such characteristics of the primary tumor as size, axillary lymph node and estrogen receptor status, or upon the fact of administration of adjuvant chemotherapy and, in patients with metastatic disease, hormone treatment.  To further investigate cytokine production by macrophages, spontaneous and LPS-induced interleukin-1 (IL-1) production was investigated also.  However, no difference was found between patients and controls concerning IL-1 generation.  The authors thus conclude that LPS-induced TNF production was impaired in breast cancer independent of the presence of detectable metastatic disease, whereas IL-1 production remained unimpaired.
Medroxyprogesterone acetate lowers plasma corticotropin and cortisol but does not suppress anterior pituitary responsiveness to human corticotropin releasing factor.  The endocrine action of medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) has been claimed to be of a glucocorticoid-like nature.  Upon clinical observation, MPA has been shown to improve life quality and overall well-being in patients with advanced breast cancer, renal carcinoma, prostatic carcinoma, and uterine adenocarcinoma.  The authors have evaluated MPA endocrine action by the administration of human corticotropin releasing factor (hCRF) in a 90-minute assay in 15 patients with advanced breast cancer or renal cell carcinoma both, before the initiation of oral high-dose MPA treatment (1000 mg MPA) as well as after at least 10 days of therapy.  The curves for corticotropin, beta-endorphin, and cortisol responses to hCRF of tumor patients who were tested before the initiation of MPA treatment were parallel to the curves of a healthy control group of probands tested under equal conditions, although at significantly higher respective hormone levels.  In patients with malignant disorders assayed after MPA administration, both basal and peak hormone levels were found to be comparable with values obtained in healthy controls.  In conclusion, MPA appeared to act at a suprapituitary level since pituitary responsiveness to hCRF was preserved under MPA treatment.  Moreover, it appeared that MPA brought the hormonal stress state found in patients with malignant tumors back to normal.
Sialosyl-Tn. A novel mucin antigen associated with prognosis in colorectal cancer patients.  Colon cancers typically produce mucin.  However, it is not known whether tumor mucin plays a biological role in cancer cell behavior.  To address this issue, the expression of a mucin-associated antigen, sialosyl-Tn, was examined by immunohistochemical study in 128 primary colorectal carcinoma specimens from 137 patients who underwent curative surgical resection.  Antigen expression was correlated with disease-free and overall 5-year survival.  Sialosyl-Tn antigen expression occurred in 112 (87.5%) tumors, and was independent of age, gender, tumor location, Dukes' stage, depth of invasion, degree of differentiation, and ploidy status.  Survival at 5 years for patients with sialosyl-Tn-negative versus sialosyl-Tn-positive tumors was 100% versus 73% (P less than 0.05) and disease-free survival was 94% versus 73%, respectively (P = 0.12).  Although more advanced Dukes' stage, deeper invasion, and aneuploidy were all associated with poorer overall 5-year survival, antigen-negative tumors within each of these groups had much better prognoses than antigen-positive tumors.  Multivariate regression analysis revealed that tumor ploidy (P less than 0.001) and sialosyl-Tn expression (P less than 0.05) were the two variables of most importance for predicting both disease-free and overall survival.  The authors conclude that sialosyl-Tn expression is an independent predictor of poor prognosis in colon cancer, and therefore suggest that qualitative mucin alterations may reflect important differences in the biological behavior of these neoplasms.
Increased expression of the multidrug-resistance gene in undifferentiated sarcoma.  We analyzed multidrug-resistance gene (mdr1 gene) expression in a patient with undifferentiated sarcoma of the liver using the cloned cDNA for the mdr1 gene.  Tissue samples were available at the time of initial diagnosis and of two intracranial relapses after chemotherapy with a regimen including doxorubicin and teniposide.  The level of mdr1 gene expression was increased sevenfold in the intracranial tumor at the time of first relapse and 11-fold at the second relapse.  This case may be an example of acquired multidrug resistance associated with overexpression of the mdr1 gene.
Intraoperative pathologic diagnosis of thyroid neoplasms. Report on experience with 504 specimens.  Intraoperative pathologic examination with frozen section (FS) was performed on 504 specimens of thyroid tissue obtained from 457 patients over a period of 9 years.  After examination of permanent sections (PS) a malignant neoplasm was diagnosed in 57 specimens (11.3%); 50 (87%) of these were primary thyroid carcinoma, four (8%) metastatic carcinoma, and three (5%) malignant lymphoma.  The FS diagnosis was "benign" in 448 (88.9%), "malignant" in (30) 5.9%, and "deferred" in 26 (5.2%).  The sensitivity of FS diagnosis of malignancy was 53% and the specificity and positive predictive value 100%.  The negative predictive value was 97.8% and overall accuracy 97.9%.  The PS disclosed a malignant neoplasm in 62% of specimens in which FS diagnosis was "deferred." Sixty-eight percent of papillary carcinomas, 87% of undifferentiated carcinomas, and a single case of medullary carcinoma were diagnosed with FS examination.  A FS diagnosis of malignancy was not made in any of the ten specimens containing follicular carcinoma; in all ten the neoplasms were well-differentiated and eight were encapsulated and minimally invasive.  The inability to diagnose follicular carcinoma intraoperatively with FS is the most significant factor accounting for the relatively low sensitivity of FS diagnosis of malignant thyroid neoplasms.
Cerebral tumor staging in patients with bronchial carcinoma by computed tomography.  Computerized tomographic (CT) scans of 271 patients with histologically proven bronchial carcinoma accomplished for initial tumor staging were retrospectively evaluated for signs of cerebral metastasis.  The results for the histologic subtypes were quite different.  In 13.8% of patients with small cell carcinoma and limited disease the authors found signs of brain metastasis.  However, routine cerebral staging in these patients did not seem to be useful because of lack of therapeutic consequences.  On the other hand, no patient with non-small cell carcinoma (N-SCC) and tumor Stage I or II had brain metastases.  All patients with brain metastasis from N-SCC had been classified as tumor Stage III before cerebral imaging.  Among these patients, however, the authors found brain metastasis in 17.5% of those without known distant metastatic disease (III/M0), especially in large cell carcinoma and in adenocarcinoma.  Stage III/M0 patients should undergo routine cerebral imaging if their tumor is surgically resectable and thoracotomy is planned.
Infiltration of dendritic cells in relation to tumor invasion and lymph node metastasis in human gastric cancer.  The infiltration of dendritic cells determined in 210 patients with gastric carcinoma was investigated from the standpoint of tumor invasion, lymph node metastasis, and prognosis.  Dendritic cell infiltration was graded as "slight" and "marked." The 39% frequency in the marked infiltration group at the mucosal stage did not change in proportion to invasion into the deeper layers.  The 5-year survival rate was 60.4% in patients with marked infiltration and 38.8% in those with slight infiltration, which was statistically different (P less than 0.01).  The difference in survival rates was only statistically significant in those with cancer emerging from the serosa (P less than 0.001).  There was a similar incidence of lymph node metastasis between the marked and slight infiltration groups in each grade of tumor invasion.  However, marked infiltration of dendritic cells prevented widespread nodal involvement beyond the primary node in cases of advanced carcinoma (P less than 0.05).  These findings indicate that infiltrating dendritic cells do not prevent the spread of tumor invasion but do prevent nodal involvement; therefore, for patients with a gastric cancer emerging from the serosa, the prognosis will be good.
Familial occurrence of gastric cancer in the 2-year experience of a population-based registry.  The authors studied the familial occurrence of tumors in 154 individuals with gastric cancer by reviewing the clinical data and the genealogical tree of all patients registered in 1986 through 1987 in the Local Health Care District of Modena, Italy, for cancer of the stomach.  Crude and age-adjusted (world population) incidence rates of gastric cancer were 34.0 and 21.4 new cases/100,000/year, respectively, in men, and 24.5 and 10.9 in women, respectively.  Among first-degree relatives of the registered patients there were 30 cases of gastric carcinoma versus 15 cases in a control group matched for age and sex (Mantel-Haenszel odds ratio [M-H OR] 3.14, P less than 0.01).  This excess of gastric neoplasms was observed in siblings (17 versus 7, M-H OR 4.33, P less than 0.02) but not in parents (13 versus 8, not significant).  Besides gastric cancer, there was no significant excess of other type of tumors in case families.  The familial occurrence of gastric cancer tended to be more frequent in patients with "diffuse" carcinoma (52%) than in subjects with "intestinal" cancer (33%), although the difference was not statistically significant.  In conclusion, the current investigation suggests that a "family history" for gastric neoplasms is usually observed in approximately 10% to 15% of the registered cases.  As already described for other common malignancies, therefore, the familial occurrence of gastric carcinoma suggests the existence of a genetic susceptibility to cancer of the stomach, at least in a fraction of these patients.
Complications associated with limb salvage for extremity sarcomas and their management.  A retrospective clinical review of 100 consecutive patients with extremity sarcomas managed by limb salvage operations was performed to evaluate local tumor control and morbidity.  The mean follow-up period was 45.1 months.  Overall survival was 86%.  There were local recurrences in 3% of patients, and 26 complications in 22 patients.  Wound necrosis was the most frequent complication.  Failure of allogeneic bone graft operations occurred in 25 patients.  Most of the complications were salvageable without loss of limb.  Limb salvage is an acceptable surgical treatment of extremity sarcomas based on adequate local control and minimal morbidity.
Leiomyoma of a digital artery.  Benign, soft-tissue masses of the hand are common.  A vascular leiomyoma is an unusual tumor of smooth-muscle origin.  In a 62-year-old man, the tumor arose from within a digital artery.  Persistent symptoms prompted an excisional biopsy, requiring resection of a portion of the artery.  Adequate collateral circulation preempted the need for a vascular graft.  Vascular repair or grafting may be necessary if collateral circulation is not adequate.
Survival in patients with large-bowel cancer. A population-based investigation from the Melbourne Colorectal Cancer Study.  Five-year survival data were obtained in 97 percent or 1105 of 1140 new patients with histologically confirmed colorectal adenocarcinoma during a 12-month period in 1981 and 1982, as part of a large comprehensive population-based study of colorectal cancer incidence, etiology, and survival, The Melbourne Colorectal Cancer Study.  Fifteen percent of patients were Dukes' A stage, 32 percent were Dukes' B, 25 percent were Dukes' C, and 29 percent were Dukes' D.  At five years after diagnosis, the observed survival rate was 36 percent and the adjusted rate was 42 percent.  Dukes' staging was a highly discriminating factor in survival (P less than 0.001).  Survival rates were better in women than in men and better for patients with colon cancer than for patients with rectal cancer.  Survival by Dukes' staging was not affected by colon subsite or by the tumor being the first and single tumor, metachronous tumor, or synchronous tumor.  The survival of younger patients was better for Dukes' stages A, B, and C, and worse for Dukes' D.  Survival was worse in the presence of bowel perforation in Dukes' C and D stages.  Within Dukes' D (incurable cases), survival was best in the absence of hepatic metastases, slightly worse when only hepatic metastases were present, and poorest in the presence of both hepatic and extrahepatic metastases.  Statistical modeling of survival determinants other than staging indicated that cell differentiation had the largest effect (survival decreasing with poor cell differentiation), followed by site (survival worse for rectal cancer than colon cancer), then age (survival better for younger patients), while bowel perforation had the smallest effect on survival.
Early gastric cancer. Endoscopic diagnosis of depth of invasion.  In order to decide on a treatment strategy against gastric cancers, an accurate preoperative evaluation of the depth of cancer invasion is essential.  Preoperative endoscopic diagnosis of the depth of invasion was compared with pathological results of the resected specimen in 206 early gastric cancers and 32 early-like advanced gastric cancers.  The endoscopic distinction between early and early-like advanced cancers was correctly made in 83.6% of the cases.  Among the early gastric cancers, mucosal and submucosal invasion was correctly presumed in 71.9% of the cases.  When the tumor was an elevated type, or located in the antrum, the endoscopic diagnosis tended to be deeper than the true depth.  The size of tumor contributed little to the depth diagnosis.  Pathomorphological changes on the tips of converging folds were the important clue for diagnosing depth.
Cholecystokinin stimulates growth of human pancreatic adenocarcinoma SW-1990.  The effect of a synthetic analogue of CCK (Thr4,Nle7CCK-9) on growth of SW-1990 human pancreatic cancer was examined in two experimental models.  Nude mice bearing SW-1990 pancreatic cancer xenografts were injected with CCK (5, 15, or 25 micrograms/kg) or vehicle twice daily for 20 days.  Animals were then sacrificed and tumor volume, weight, protein, and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) content were evaluated.  SW-1990 cells were grown in vitro and the effects of CCK, secretin, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), and proglumide (a CCK-receptor antagonist) on cell number and DNA synthesis were determined.  The highest dose of CCK, 25 micrograms/kg, significantly increased tumor weight, protein content, and DNA content (P less than 0.005).  In vitro, CCK caused significant increases in cell counts of up to 47% at six days and 66% at 12 days compared to control.  Graded concentrations of CCK had a biphasic effect on DNA synthesis with significant increases of up to 65% (P less than 0.005).  CCK-induced cell proliferation was inhibited by proglumide.  Secretin slightly increased cancer cell growth, although not as potently as CCK, VIP or secretin in combination with CCK did not show potentiation.  These results indicate that growth of some human pancreatic cancers may be influenced by gastrointestinal peptides, of which CCK is the most potent.
Prospective study of alcohol intake and large bowel cancer.  The alcohol intake of a cohort of Japanese men in Hawaii is directly and significantly related to the risk of developing rectal cancer, whether assessed on the basis of amount consumed or as a percent of total calories.  Wine and whiskey are directly related to rectal cancer, but beer is the only alcoholic beverage that displays a statistically significant dose-response (P = 0.008).  Colon cancer risk also is related directly to alcohol intake, but the association is statistically significant only when measured as a percent of energy intake.  This suggests that alcohol might displace cancer inhibitors from the diet.  Calcium, vitamin C, and dietary fiber are inversely related to colon cancer risk in this cohort, and each of these micronutrients displays statistically significant negative correlation with alcohol intake.  A possible positive association between alcohol and lung cancer was ruled out after adjusting for cigarette smoking.  Cancers of the prostate and stomach were unrelated to alcohol intake, but the risk of acquiring cancer at all other sites combined was strongly related to alcohol intake.
Diagnosis of metastatic lesions to the stomach by salvage cytology. A report of three cases.  Secondary neoplasms of the stomach are rare and are often clinical and diagnostic problems.  Three patients with bleeding "volcano-like" ulcers were diagnosed by combined endoscopic "salvage" cytology and surgical biopsy as having metastatic submucosal lesions from hematologic spread.  The combination of endoscopic appearance, clinical findings, and tissue and cytologic examination can lead to the correct diagnosis.  The results from these cases support the utility of this cytologic technique in combination with biopsy in this clinical setting.
Primary non-Hodgkin's T-cell lymphoma of the esophagus. A case with peculiar endoscopic ultrasonographic pattern.  We report a case of primary esophageal non-Hodgkin's T-cell lymphoma in a young white female.  At admission, endoscopy revealed large, irregularly shaped, esophageal ulcerations with super imposed candidiasis.  Endoscopic ultrasonography to assess submucosal alterations and periesophageal involvement revealed a diffuse hypoechogenic thickening (up to 5 mm) of the esophageal wall, a pattern consistent with lymphomatous infiltration.  Definitive diagnosis was made with the aid of histology and immunohistochemistry.
Anionic complex-carbohydrate units of human thyroglobulin.  Human thyroglobulin (hTG) contains sulfate in chondroitin 6-sulfate chains and in complex carbohydrates.  In this study the sulfate-containing complex carbohydrates were characterized by the number of sulfate and sialic acid residues that they contain.  Samples of normal and nodular thyroid tissue were incubated for 16 h in [35S]sulfate-containing medium, and hTG was purified from the tissues and the media.  Complex carbohydrates were enzymatically removed from hTG.  Subsequent analysis on an HPLC anion exchange column at pH 2.2 separated the carbohydrate units according to their number of negative charges.  Sulfate-containing peaks were monitored by radioactivity, and sialic acid-containing peaks were identified by their shift to lower charge after treatment with neuraminidase.  Peaks corresponding to sialic acid-free carbohydrate units with one to four sulfates were identified.  Also, carbohydrate units with two and three negative charges containing both sulfate and sialic acid were present.  In the nodular tissue of one patient there were more sulfated units with higher charge, especially units containing sialic acid.  In this patient the proportion of sulfated polyvalent units with sialic acid was 22.4% for normal and 64.6% for nodular tissue.  No difference in the composition of the charged units between the tissues and their corresponding media was seen, making it unlikely that the sulfate-containing carbohydrates play a role in hTG release.  It is concluded that hTG contains complex carbohydrate units with up to four sulfate groups and units with both sulfate and sialic acid.  In some patients, the sulfate-containing anionic carbohydrate units of hTG from normal and nodular thyroid tissue are different.
Detection of duodenal gastrinomas by operative endoscopic transillumination. A prospective study.  The ability of operative endoscopic transillumination of the bowel wall to detect duodenal gastrinoma was evaluated prospectively in 26 patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.  The results were assessed by exploratory laparotomy and compared with the results of other localization techniques.  Twelve duodenal gastrinomas were resected from 10 patients.  Operative endoscopic transillumination detected 10 of the 12 gastrinomas, a sensitivity of 83%, which was significantly greater (P less than 0.05) than that for either preoperative imaging (25%) or intraoperative ultrasonography and palpation (42%).  The sensitivity of operative endoscopic transillumination was a result of the ability to detect focal areas that did not transilluminate on the serosal side of the duodenum, and not the mucosal appearances seen through the endoscope, which were not helpful.  Operative endoscopic transillumination detected gastrinomas less than 1 cm in diameter throughout the duodenum.  Of the patients in this study, 39% had duodenal gastrinomas, a greater frequency than previously reported.  These results indicate that operative endoscopic transillumination is the most sensitive technique yet described for detecting duodenal gastrinomas and should be performed routinely in all patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome who undergo exploratory laparotomy for cure.
Liver fatty acid-binding protein: a marker for studying cellular differentiation in gut epithelial neoplasms.  Human liver fatty acid binding protein is a 127 residue cytoplasmic protein synthesized in liver and in the intestinal epithelium.  Previous studies of normal and transgenic mice indicated that the liver fatty acid-binding protein gene is a sensitive marker of enterocytic differentiation.  This study shows the use of immunohistochemical methods to examine liver fatty acid-binding protein gene expression in normal human colonic epithelium, colonic villoglandular adenomas, nonmucinous and mucinous adenocarcinomas, and several types of noncolonic epithelial neoplasms.  Cells containing liver fatty acid-binding protein were found in normal colonic epithelium, in two thirds of colorectal villoglandular adenomas and nonmucinous adenocarcinomas, and in one third of mucinous adenocarcinomas but not in noncolonic, nonhepatic carcinomas.  All liver fatty acid-binding protein-positive colonic adenomas and adenocarcinomas contained patches of immunoreactive cells distributed among histologically identical patches of cells without liver fatty acid-binding protein immunoreactivity.  This "mosaicism" was also found in metastases from liver fatty acid-binding protein-positive colonic adenocarcinomas.  Immunostaining of these liver fatty acid-binding protein-positive tissues for carcinoembryonic antigen did not show a mosaic cellular pattern in its expression.  These data suggest that within a given neoplasm, differences exist in the differentiation programs of monoclonally-derived, malignant colonic epithelial cells and that liver fatty acid-binding protein is a useful marker for operationally defining these subpopulations.  Liver fatty acid-binding protein is also a potentially useful diagnostic marker for colorectal and hepatic carcinomas.
Performing screening flexible sigmoidoscopy using colonoscopes: experience in 500 subjects.  There is still controversy regarding the optimal length of flexible sigmoidoscopes.  We performed screening distal colon examinations using 168-cm colonoscopes in 500 asymptomatic subjects who were unsedated and had sigmoidoscopy cleansing preparation.  The mean depth of penetration was 66 cm and was similar in persons in whom the examination was discontinued because of poor preparation versus those with discomfort.  Polyps were detected in 87 patients, but only 5 subjects had polyps detected above 60 cm.  We conclude that in a group of unsedated subjects scheduled for flexible sigmoidoscopy after a sigmoidoscopy prep, the use of instruments longer than 60 cm gives very little additional yield.
Insulin-like growth factor-II: possible local growth factor in pheochromocytoma.  Pheochromocytomas, neural crest tumors, express an abundance of insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF-II).  To assess further the potential for IGF-II to play an autocrine role for these tumors, we measured 1) IGF-II content by RRA in 7 pheochromocytomas and peripheral blood in these patients, 2) IGF-II receptors by Western analysis, and 3) characterized the tumor binding proteins by ligand blot studies.  IGF-II levels in the tumors varied from 2.8-41 micrograms/g.  Chromatography revealed that 60% of the peptide eluted as a large mol wt form of IGF-II (8.7-10 kDa); the remainder coeluted with mature peptide (7.5 kDa).  This was in contrast to IGF-II levels in normal adrenal tissue (0.225 +/- 0.005 micrograms/g) or another neural crest-derived tumor, medullary carcinoma of the thyroid (0.63 +/- 0.02 micrograms/g).  Serum IGF-II levels in the 7 patients with pheochromocytoma (720 +/- 71 ng/mL) were similar to those in 35 normal controls (762 +/- 69 ng/mL).  Radiolabeled IGF-II (9 +/- 1%) and IGF-I (20 +/- 2%) bound specifically to pheochromocytoma membranes.  Western analysis of these membranes using a specific antiserum directed against the type II receptor demonstrated a band at 210 kDa.  Affinity cross-linking studies with [125I]IGF-I demonstrated a specific band at 140 kDa.  Ligand blot analysis was performed on the void volume pools from the Sephadex G-75 column and demonstrated bands at about 30 and 25 kDa.  In conclusion, these data 1) confirm that pheochromocytomas have increased levels of IGF-II; 2) demonstrate that despite high IGF-II concentrations in the tumors, peripheral levels are not elevated, suggesting that very little tumoral IGF-II is released into the circulation, unlike catecholamines; 3) demonstrate the presence of IGF-II and IGF-I receptors; 4) describe binding protein species similar to those present in other tissues.  Thus, the presence of high levels of IGF-II and both type I and type II receptors suggests that IGF II may act through both receptors to alter tumor growth.
Transthyretin receptors on human astrocytoma cells.  Transthyretin (TTR), a transport protein for T4 and retinol-binding protein, is the principal T4-binding protein of cerebrospinal fluid.  Its function in regard to the delivery of its ligands and in other respects is unclear.  The binding of [125I] TTR to cultured human astrocytoma cells was studied to determine whether these cells carry receptors for TTR.  Scatchard analysis was consistent with a single class of binding sites with a Kd of 3 nM.  No significant cross-reactivity with transferrin or serum albumin was observed.  Internalization of TTR was temperature dependent and proportional to receptor occupancy.  Dilutions of cerebrospinal fluid displaced [125I]TTR in proportion to their content of radioimmunoassayable TTR and in parallel with purified TTR.  The uptake and internalization of TTR increased in the presence of high T4 or T3 concentrations.  These results demonstrate that TTR binds to specific high affinity receptors on human astrocytoma cells.  Receptor binding of TTR provides a potential mechanism for the delivery of its ligands within the central nervous system.
Growth of cultured human cerebral meningiomas is inhibited by dopaminergic agents. Presence of high affinity dopamine-D1 receptors.  We have found that microM concentrations of the dopamine agonist bromocriptine significantly decrease the proliferation rate of human meningioma cells in culture (25-56% inhibition).  This effect was also seen with direct application of dopamine, as well as the dopamine-D1 agonist (+)-SKF-38393 (both applied in microM concentrations) to meningioma cell cultures.  Receptor studies with the dopamine-D1 ligand (125I)SCH-23982 (dopamine-D1 antagonist) indicated that dopamine-D1 binding sites were present in the membranes of meningioma tissue.  The mean dissociation constant (Kd) was 325 ( +/- 74.5 SEM) pM and the receptor density (Bmax) was 25.4 ( +/- 1.5 SEM) fmol/mg pellet protein in 5 human meningiomas.  The pharmacological specificity was proven by (+)-SKF-38393, ( +/-SKF-83566 or (+)-butaclamol and their inactive isomers (-)-SKF-38393 and (-)-butaclamol in a 1000 fold excess.  These results provide evidence that human meningiomas possess high affinity dopamine-D1 receptors and that dopamine agonists have an antiproliferative effect on these tumors in culture.  We conclude that the proliferation of cerebral meningiomas may be under dopaminergic control and that dopamine agonists may have a role in the medical treatment of patients with meningiomas.
Endothelin-like immunoreactivity in human breast cyst fluid.  Immunoreactive endothelin has been detected in 21 of 43 samples of breast cyst fluid (21 cases; 3.5 +/- 0.6 pmol/l, mean +/- SEM.  Other 22 cases; not detectable, less than 0.5 pmol/l).  Fast protein liquid chromatographic analysis of the immunoreactive endothelin of pooled breast cyst fluid showed two immunoreactive peaks; one in the void volume and the other in the position of endothelin-1.  It is probable that endothelin-1 is produced by the epithelial cells lining breast cysts, but significance of the presence of endothelin-1 in breast cyst fluid remains to be elucidated.
Tissue preparation for simultaneous flow cytometric quantitation of tumour associated antigens and DNA in solid tumours.  A multiparameter flow cytometric assay for the simultaneous study of tumour associated antigens (TAA) and DNA in fresh solid tumours was devised.  Cell suspensions were prepared by disaggregating unfixed solid tumour samples mechanically over a stainless steel mesh.  Indirect immunofluorescence was used to identify the TAA, and DNA was stained with propidium iodide.  Cell morphology was well preserved, cell clumping was negligible, and high quality indirect immunofluorescence quality indirect immunofluorescence and DNA staining were obtained.  The technique is simple, rapid, and reproducible.  Multiparameter assays can be developed to study prognostic indicators such as membrane oncoproteins, receptors, and multidrug resistance in solid tumours.  With a suitable panel of antibodies the technique might become an aid in the differential diagnosis and biochemical diagnosis of some solid tumours.
Cutaneous manifestations of postthymic T cell malignancies: description of five clinicopathologic subtypes.  This study was undertaken to identify the cutaneous manifestations among different prognostic subgroups of postthymic T cell malignancies.  Cutaneous involvement was demonstrated in 43 of 88 cases.  We recognized five clinicopathologic subtypes: type I, classical cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL) or mycosis fungoides, six cases; type II, primary large cell type CTCL, Ki-1 antigen (Ki-1+ or Ki-1-), seven cases; type III, primary angioinvasive T cell lymphoma, three cases; type IV, human T-lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I+) adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL), eight cases; type V, secondary cutaneous involvement by peripheral T cell lymphoma (PTL), 19 cases.  Primary CTCL and ATL tend to involve papillary dermis with or without epidermotropism, whereas PTL and angioinvasive T cell lymphoma predominantly affect skin adnexae, vessels, and subcutis.  Cutaneous lesions in type V PTL are heterogeneous and may be confused with panniculitis, vasculitis, or an eczematous eruption.  Classic CTCL, Ki-1+ lymphoma, and angioinvasive T cell lymphoma have a chronic course, whereas ATL, Ki-1- large cell lymphoma, and PTL are clinically aggressive.
Giant eccrine acrospiroma.  Four cases of large eccrine acrospiroma (three benign, one malignant) are reported.  The benign tumors involved the lower extremities of two women and one man (73 to 89 years of age).  The duration of the lesions ranged from 10 to 20 years.  The malignant tumor involved the left side of the chest of a 60-year-old man.  Its occurrence in a lesion that had been present for 40 years suggested malignant transformation of a pre-existing benign eccrine acrospiroma.  Each tumor showed little to no cellular atypia.  Mitotic rates (mitotic figures per 10 high-power fields) varied both between and within lesions.  Average mitotic rates did not differentiate the benign from the malignant tumors.  The most important distinguishing features of large benign eccrine acrospiromas are the relative circumscription, the lack of cellular atypia, and the absence of stromal, perineurial, and angiolymphatic invasion.
Buschke-Loewenstein tumor: verrucous carcinoma of the penis.  The Buschke-Loewenstein tumor is an anogenital tumor of characteristic clinical and histologic pattern best considered as a low-grade, well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma.  This remarkable neoplasm and its features are reviewed in detail, stressing salient advances in our understanding of it.
Cutaneous melanoma and bilateral retinoblastoma.  We report the case of an otherwise healthy 37-year-old man who had had bilateral enucleation during early childhood for bilateral retinoblastomas, in addition to two cutaneous melanomas (the first appearing at age 27 years).  He also had dysplastic melanocytic nevi and a history of cutaneous melanoma in his mother.  Retinoblastoma may aggregate in families and is associated with DNA abnormalities of chromosome 13.  Recent reports have emphasized the appearance of second malignancies in retinoblastoma survivors.  The second malignancies include osteosarcoma, soft tissue sarcoma, and cutaneous melanoma.  Cutaneous melanoma also may aggregate in families, usually in the setting of dysplastic melanocytic nevi.  The features of this case and of similar reported cases suggest that there may be a greater than expected association between retinoblastoma and cutaneous melanoma.
Oncogenes and suppressor genes: their involvement in colon cancer [editorial]  Abnormalities in oncogenes, which are broadly classified into viral and cellular oncogenes, and suppressor genes appear critical for the development of colon cancer.  Cellular oncogenes contribute to malignant transformation when they become activated by point mutation, translocation, amplification, or loss of regulator sequences.  The properties of the oncoproteins, the proteins encoded by oncogenes which are essential for carcinogenesis, are unclear.  Suppressor genes normally suppress the tumorigenic phenotype by keeping the growth of cells in check; it is their inactivation that contributes to malignant transformation.  Development of colon cancer appears to take place by stepwise accumulation of multiple genetic alterations during the progression from normal colon to adenoma and carcinoma.  Activation of ras, an early event in this sequence, is found in 50% of colon cancers; overexpression of c-myc is found in approximately 80%.  Inactivation of suppressor genes, which occurs during later stages, is noted in greater than 70% of tumors.  A current model of colonic tumorigenesis is presented.
Liver transplant for metastatic neuroendocrine tumor.  Generally, the results of liver transplantation for metastatic liver disease have not been favorable.  One exception has been the unique group of neuroendocrine tumors, the slow growth of which allows liver transplantation to effectively palliate and control symptoms.  We report two cases: (a) A 51-year-old man who underwent orthotopic liver transplantation and resection of the pancreatic primary tumor for a nonfunctioning malignant neuroendocrine tumor with features of both carcinoid and islet-cell glucagonoma remains symptom-free and without evidence of tumor recurrence at 13 months follow-up.  (b) A 47-year-old man who underwent orthotopic liver transplantation and Whipple resection for a metastatic islet-cell tumor in the head of the pancreas is fully recovered at 5 months follow-up.
Insulinoma after streptozotocin therapy for metastatic gastrinoma: natural history or iatrogenic complication?  Islet cell carcinoma frequently produces more than one chemical product, although its clinical expression is usually restricted to a single hormone.  We describe an unusual patient who presented with full-blown metastasizing gastrinoma.  He was treated with cimetidine for five years and then streptozotocin therapy, which resulted in a regression in hepatomegaly and a fall in serum gastrin levels.  Following one year's therapy with streptozotocin, he was admitted in hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemic stupor.  This appears to be the first reported case of a "shift" from clinical gastrinoma to insulinoma possibly related to prolonged streptozotocin therapy.
Insulin-like growth factor-I supports proliferation of autocrine thymic lymphoma cells with a pre-T cell phenotype.  We have studied the phenotypic characteristics and growth properties of murine T lymphoma cell lines derived from primary x-ray-induced thymic lymphomas at the earliest stage at which they can be detected, and well before spreading to other organs has occurred.  These cell lines serve as model systems for the earliest events in T cell lymphoma induction, before tumor cell progression and spreading to other organs.  We find that primary x-ray-induced T cell lymphoma lines have phenotypic characteristics of thymic pre-T cells and show no proliferative response to any of the IL tested nor to other hematopoietic growth factors.  However, they do proliferate in response to insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and to a small autocrine peptide distinct from IGF-I, which we term lymphoma growth factor.  One of the earliest lesions in T cell lymphoma induction may therefore be an inhibition of differentiation at one of several specific points.  In its early stages, T lymphoma cell growth may be restricted to an environment where local concentrations of specific growth factors such as IGF-I or lymphoma growth factor are sufficiently high.
Regional and systemic distribution of anti-tumor x anti-CD3 heteroaggregate antibodies and cultured human peripheral blood lymphocytes in a human colon cancer xenograft.  Anti-tumor antibody (317G5) covalently coupled to an anti-CD3 antibody (OKT3) produces a heteroaggregate (HA) antibody that can target PBL to lyse tumor cells expressing the appropriate tumor Ag.  The i.v.  and i.p.  distribution of radiolabeled HA antibody 317G5 x OKT3 and of radiolabeled cultured human PBL were studied in athymic nude mice bearing solid intraperitoneal tumor established from the human colon tumor line, LS174T.  Mice were injected with 125I-labeled HA antibody, 125I-labeled anti-tumor mAb, or 111In-labeled PBL, and at designated timepoints tissues were harvested and measured for radioactivity.  125I-317G5 x OKT3 localized specifically to tumor sites.  Tumor radioactivity levels (percent injected dose/gram) were lower with 125I-317G5 x OKT3 HA antibody than with 125I-317G5 anti-tumor mAb, but were similar to levels reported for other anti-tumor mAb.  The major difference in radioactivity levels observed between i.v.  and i.p.  administration of 125I-317G5 x OKT3 was an increase in hepatic radioactivity after i.v.  HA antibody administration.  HA antibodies produced from F(ab')2 fragments, which exhibit decreased m.  w.  and decreased Fc receptor-mediated binding, demonstrated improved tumor:tissue ratios as compared to intact antibody HA.  125I-317G5 F(ab')2 x OKT3 F(ab')2 antibody levels were equivalent to intact HA antibody levels in tumor, but were lower than intact HA antibody levels in the blood, bowel, and liver.  Tumor:bowel ratios (20:1 at 48 h) were highest when 317G5 F(ab')2 x OKT3 F(ab')2 was injected i.p.  Autoradiography confirmed that anti-tumor x anti-CD3 HA antibodies localized specifically to intraperitoneal tumor; that i.p.  administered HA antibodies penetrated tumor directly; and that i.v.  administered HA antibodies distributed along tumor vasculature.  Cultured human PBL distributed in moderate concentrations to intraperitoneal tumor when administered i.p., but not when administered i.v.  The poor localization of i.v.  injected PBL to tumor may reflect species disparity in homing receptors and/or endothelial ligands, a problem which may be overcome with a syngeneic model.  These results suggest that regional therapy with HA antibodies and PBL may offer advantages over systemic therapy for initial clinical trials.
Lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells. V. 8-Mercaptoguanosine as an IL-2-sparing agent in LAK generation.  Guanine ribonucleosides, substituted at the C8 position with either a bromine or a thiol group, have recently been shown to regulate several immunologic responses.  We have previously shown that 8-mercaptoguanosine (8MG) can replace the requirement for cytokines in the generation of MHC-restricted CTL.  In this paper, we examined the ability of 8MG to induce MHC-nonrestricted killer cells.  We found that 8MG did not induce significant lytic activity from normal resting lymphocytes.  However, 8MG was able to synergize with minimal amounts of IL-2 in inducing lytic activity similar to lymphokine-activated killers (LAK) in that both NK-sensitive and NK-resistant tumor cells were killed.  Both the precursors and effectors of 8MG-LAK activity were similar to NK cells and were CD4- CD8- asialo-GM1+ NK1.1+.  Similar to IL-2-induced LAK, 8MG-LAK were B220+.  8MG appeared to "stage" these precursor lymphocytes to become more responsive to IL-2 because optimal induction of 8MG-LAK required preincubation with 8MG before the addition of IL-2.  This "staging" appeared to be due to the release of a "second signal" since it was readily inhibited by cyclosporine A.  Anti-IFN-alpha beta was as efficient as cyclosporine A in inhibiting 8MG-LAK generation, whereas anti-IFN-gamma and anti-IL-1 did not exhibit significant inhibition.  These findings suggest that 8MG can be of possible utility as an IL-2-sparing agent in LAK generation from NK cells.
Excision repair of pyrimidine dimers induced by simulated solar radiation in the skin of patients with basal cell carcinoma.  One prominent lesion induced in DNA by ultraviolet (UV) radiation is the cyclobutyl pyrimidine dimer formed between adjacent pyrimidines on the same DNA strand.  We investigated whether people who have developed basal cell carcinoma on sun-exposed skin have an altered ability to repair UV-induced pyrimidine dimers in DNA.  Twenty-two patients with at least one basal cell carcinoma, aged 31-84 years, and 19 healthy volunteers, aged 25-61 years, took part in the study.  Both groups were given one minimal erythema dose (MED) of simulated solar radiation on the lower back.  DNA was extracted from the irradiated skin 0 to 6 h later, and the number of UV-induced pyrimidine dimers was determined using a dimer-specific endonuclease.  At time 0, the average number of dimers per unit of DNA was similar in the two groups.  After 6 h, an average of 22 +/- 4% of the dimers were removed in the group with basal cell carcinoma compared to 33 +/- 4% in the cancer-free group.  In the basal cell carcinoma group, only 23% of the patients repaired more than 30% of the dimers after 6 h, compared with 53% of the cancer-free subjects (p less than 0.05).  We conclude that patients who develop basal cell carcinoma on sun-exposed skin may have a decreased ability to repair pyrimidine dimers induced in skin exposed to simulated solar radiation.
Premalignant lesions and cancers of the skin in the general population: evaluation of the role of human papillomaviruses.  To evaluate the role of human papillomaviruses (HPV) in the development of premalignant lesions and cancers of the skin in the general population, 314 biopsies obtained from 227 patients with benign neoplasms, premalignant lesions, and cancers of the skin and from 25 patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the lip were analyzed by Southern blot hybridization.  DNA probes specific for various cutaneous and genital HPV types were used in hybridizations conducted under nonstringent or stringent conditions.  HPV DNA sequences were only detected in eight specimens obtained from six patients: HPV 34 in one case of periungual Bowen's disease, HPV 36 and an as yet uncharacterized HPV in two cases of actinic keratosis, HPV 20 in one case of basal cell carcinoma, an as yet unrecognized HPV in one case of squamous cell carcinoma, and HPV 16 in one case of squamous cell carcinoma of the lip.  None of the specimens of cutaneous horn and keratoacanthoma contained detectable HPV DNA.  In contrast, HPV DNA sequences, mostly HPV 16, were detected in 13 of 23 cases of anogenital Bowen's disease and invasive Bowen's carcinoma.  HPV DNA sequences were not detected in 90 cutaneous samples further analyzed by the polymerase chain-reaction technique, using amplification primers that contain conserved sequences among the genomes of HPV.  These results strongly suggest that the known HPV types play only a minor role, if any, in skin carcinogenesis in the general population.
Cytomegalovirus in the brain: in vitro infection of human brain-derived cells.  Models for human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) brain infection have been developed in a variety of brain-derived cells in which the factors governing virus infectivity might be studied in vitro.  Studies were initiated with brain endothelial cells, the likely portal of entry for virus into the central nervous system.  Primary explant cultures of brain endothelial cells, derived from homogenates of healthy human brain, supported complete viral gene expression and cytopathic effect (CPE).  Endothelial cells do not appear to be a barrier for HCMV passage into the central nervous system.  Astroglial lines (primary explant or tumor-derived) varied in their ability to support HCMV replication.  Some (T98G) supported incomplete (immediate-early) gene expression while others (A-172) did not support any detectable gene expression.  Some astroglial lines (HS-683) supported extensive virus replication with minimal viral CPE.  Neuronal cell lines (SK-N-MC) were fully permissive.  The more differentiated glial lines (astrocytoma) were fully permissive to HCMV infection; however, the less differentiated glial lines (glioblastoma) were partly or nonpermissive.
Alternating cisplatinum and VAC ineffective in end stage squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.  Sixteen patients with end stage squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck were admitted to a phase II study of alternating courses of cisplatinum (100 mg/m2) and VAC (vincristine 1.4 mg/m2, adriamycin 50 mg/m2, cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2) given at three weekly intervals.  Only two patients achieved a response (12 per cent).  The median survival time was 62 days which is much the same as that of a similar group of patients who received no chemotherapy in a previous trial (70 days).
Head and neck cancer and ageing: a retrospective study in 438 patients.  To evaluate whether age over 70 years represents a prognostic factor in head and neck cancer, we reviewed all cases observed between 1981 and 1984.  Four hundred and thirty-eight (438) patients were considered in relation to three age groups (less than or equal to 59, 60-69, and greater than or equal to 70 years, defined as non-elderly, mid-elderly and elderly respectively).  The main parameters analyzed included histological diagnosis (no difference emerged among the three age groups); anatomical site (hypopharyngeal carcinoma was most frequent in non-elderly patients); TNM stage (an higher incidence of early stages was seen in the elderly); performance status (better in the non-elderly); previous illnesses (life-style related diseases were more frequent in the non-elderly); contraindications to surgery (more frequent in the elderly); surgical treatment ('en bloc' resections were more often employed in the non-elderly); post-operative complications and local control (no difference between the three groups); multiple primary malignancies (head and neck, oesophagus and lung were more frequent in non-elderly patients) and survival (no difference).  Although age affects several features of head and neck cancer patients, it does not appear from the present study to be an independent prognostic factor for local control and survival.  With regard to survival, stage appeared to be the most important prognostic factor.
Prognostic value of c-myc proto-oncogene overexpression in early invasive carcinoma of the cervix.  The prognostic effect of c-myc oncogene overexpression was assessed in a multivariate analysis of 93 patients with invasive carcinoma of the cervix, stage Ib, IIa, and IIb proximal.  The treatment was based on the association of brachytherapy-colpohysterectomy and lymphadenectomy.  Analysis of c-myc gene expression was done using Northern and slot blot hybridization techniques.  Overexpression of c-myc (ie, levels at least three times the mean observed in normal tissues) was present in 33% of the tumors.  The proportion of carcinomas with c-myc overexpression significantly increased with the size of the primary tumor (P = .04).  No relationship was found between c-myc overexpression and the other clinical and histologic parameters, including the nodal status.  The relative risk of relapse (overall, pelvic failure, distant metastases) was analyzed in a Cox's proportional hazards model.  Three factors were significantly related to the risk of overall relapse when the multivariate analysis was performed, namely, the tumor size, the nodal status, and c-myc expression.  A combination of c-myc expression and the nodal status provided a very accurate indication of the risk of relapse.  Indeed, patients with negative nodes had a 3-year disease-free survival rate of 93% (95% confidence interval [Cl], 79% to 98%) when c-myc was expressed at a normal level, whereas this rate was only 51% (95% Cl, 26% to 63%) when c-myc was overexpressed (log-rank test, P = .02).  In addition, in the subgroup of patients with positive nodes, this rate was 44% (95% Cl, 25% to 77%) and 15% (95% Cl, 4% to 49%) when c-myc gene was expressed at normal level, or overexpressed, respectively.  Finally, c-myc gene overexpression was, in the multivariate analysis, the first factor selected by the model regarding the risk of distant metastases.
Human tumor fluorouracil trapping: clinical correlations of in vivo 19F nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy pharmacokinetics.  We previously reported that fluorouracil (5FU) accumulation and metabolism in human livers and tumors can be studied by in vivo nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMRS).  We have extended these observations by evaluating the pharmacokinetics of 5FU in the tumors of 11 patients with carcinoma of the breast, colon, endometrium, cervix, and kidney, using 19F-NMRS in a 1.5 Magnetom (Siemens Medical Systems, Cerrito, CA) magnetic resonance imaging unit (MRI).  These NMRS measurements detected a long-lived tumor pool of 5FU in six of 11 tumors in our patients including carcinomas in the pelvis, breast, lung, and liver.  The half-life (T1/2) of this tumor pool of "trapped" 5FU was 0.33 to 1.3 hours (20 to 78 minutes), much longer than the T1/2 of 5FU in blood (5 to 15 minutes).  Neither the anabolites of 5FU (fluorinated nucleosides, nucleotides, 5FU-RNA, or 5FU-thymidylate synthase) nor the catabolites (eg, fluorobetaalanine [FBAL]) were detectable by 19F NMRS.  Patient response to chemotherapy appeared to correlate with the extent of trapping of free 5FU in the human tumors: in the seven patients receiving 5FU, or 5FU or FUdR plus leucovorin, four of four patients whose tumors trapped 5FU responded to fluorinated pyrimidine chemotherapy, whereas three patients in whom there was a failure to detect tumor trapping were resistant to 5FU.  We conclude that NMRS is clinically feasible, and enables investigators to study 5FU pharmacokinetics and metabolism in tumors in vivo.  19F-NMRS of 5FU allows for in vivo evaluation of 5FU metabolic modulation and might be able to guide therapeutic decisions.
Changes in the clearance of total and unbound etoposide in patients with liver dysfunction.  The disposition of total and non-protein-bound etoposide was investigated in 21 cancer patients receiving etoposide and cisplatin combination chemotherapy.  Etoposide plasma concentrations were determined using a specific high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method, and etoposide plasma protein binding was determined by equilibrium dialysis.  The patients had a wide range of renal function (creatinine clearance, 32 to 159 mL/min/m2) and hepatic function (total bilirubin range, 0.3 to 21.5 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase [AST] range, 14 to 415 IU/L; serum albumin range, 2.7 to 4.1 g/dL).  The mean etoposide total systemic clearance was not different in 15 patients with total bilirubin less than 1.0 mg/dL versus six patients with total bilirubin 1.1 to 21.5 mg/dL (18.7 +/- 5.9 mL/min/m2 v 26.4 +/- 10.7 mL/min/m2; t-test P = .06), with a trend toward higher total clearance in the patients with abnormal bilirubin values.  However, the mean clearance of unbound etoposide was significantly lower in patients with increased total bilirubin (220 +/- 90 mL/min/m2 v 135 +/- 61 mL/min/m2; t-test P = .027).  The fraction of etoposide unbound (fu) in plasma was significantly higher in patients with increased bilirubin (9% +/- 3% v 27% +/- 15%; t-test P = .002), explaining the trend toward higher total clearance in these patients.  Etoposide clearance (total or unbound) in the 14 patients with measurable hepatic metastases was not different from the clearance in the seven patients without hepatic metastases.  This study provides an explanation for why patients with increased bilirubin do not have lower total systemic clearance of etoposide, and indicates that such patients have a higher exposure to unbound etoposide.  The results of ongoing pharmacodynamic studies of total and unbound etoposide in patients with increased bilirubin will determine the clinical relevance of altered etoposide protein binding.
Clinical evaluation of a side entry access port: a novel dual-lumen venous access device.  The initial clinical experience with a low-profile side entry access (SEA) dual-lumen implantable venous access port for cancer chemotherapy administration is summarized in this report.  The catheter material is polyurethane.  The overall experience in 35 patients in this study was a total of 6,224 patient days, with a mean of 178 days per patient.  A variety of chemotherapeutic agents, biologic response modifiers, and antibiotics were administered.  In 26% of the patients, the device chambers were in simultaneous use during the treatment period.  A 6% incidence of clinical subclavian vein thrombosis was noted.  There was no infectious complications.  Inconsistencies in blood withdrawal and temporary catheter dysfunction were comparable to other access ports in clinical use.  The novel design of this side entry port and the catheter material of low thrombogenicity make this device a good option in patients requiring a low-profile system and dual access.  Nursing staff should be made aware of the side entry design and that in-service training for accessing the septum is required in centers where such devices are not routinely used.
A prospective, randomized evaluation of the treatment of colorectal cancer metastatic to the liver.  Over a 4-year period (1982 to 1986), 91 patients with solitary or multiple metastases from colorectal cancer were stratified, based on findings at laparotomy, to one of three groups and then prospectively randomized to one of two treatment arms within each group.  Group A patients had solitary resectable metastases, group B patients had multiple, resectable metastases, and group C patients had multiple, unresectable metastases.  Patients were randomized to one of two treatment arms within a group: group A-arm A1: resection only, arm A2: resection and continuous hepatic artery infusion (CHAI) of fluorodeoxyuridine (FUdR); group B-arm B1: resection and CHAI, arm B2: CHAI only; group C-arm C1: CHAI, arm C2: systemic fluorouracil followed by CHAI.  Median time to failure (TTF) was 31.8, 11.1, and 8.8 months for groups A, B, and C, respectively.  Arm A2 had an improved TTF when compared with arm A1 (P = .03).  Median survival correlated with extent of disease and was 37.3, 22.4, and 13.8 months for groups A, B, and C, respectively.  Survival was not changed by treatment variation (arms) within each group.  Two- and 5-year cumulative survivals for groups A, B, and C were 72.7% and 45.4%; 45.8% and 16.7%; and 31.7% and 3.2%, respectively.  In patients with multiple metastases (groups B and C), those patients whose original tumor was a Dukes' B had a significantly improved TTF and survival over those patients whose tumor was a Dukes' C (P less than or equal to .02).
The unique aspects of acute promyelocytic leukemia.  Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) accounts for approximately 10% of cases of acute myeloid leukemia (AML).  Distinctive features of this disorder at the time of diagnosis include leukopenia coexisting with a marrow replaced with granulated dysplastic promyelocytes, disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, lack of Ia (HLA-DR) antigen expression, and translocation between the long arms of chromosomes 15 and 17 (t[15;17]).  Heparin is widely but not universally used to interfere with the coagulopathy during the initial phases of treatment.  Serial bone marrow examinations during the induction period demonstrate the achievement of remission despite the persistence of malignant-appearing promyelocytes.  Patients with APL are generally younger than those with other subtypes of AML, have a 70% to 80% likelihood of entering remission, and are thought to have a more favorable prognosis than other individuals with AML.  Remission may be achieved with a conventional anthracycline-cytarabine combination, anthracycline alone, or, apparently, all-trans retinoic acid.  Genes potentially important in myeloid differentiation such as granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and myeloperoxidase are located close to the breakpoint in the t(15;17) but have not been conclusively shown to be rearranged in the translocation.  A better understanding of the unique aspects of APL may well shed light on the pathogenetic processes of AML.
Intraperitoneal yttrium-90-labeled monoclonal antibody in ovarian cancer   From March 1987 to March 1988, a phase I to II study was carried out in 25 patients with ovarian cancer.  They received escalating doses of intraperitoneally (IP) administered yttrium-90 (Y-90)-labeled monoclonal antibody, HMFG1, against a tumor cell-surface antigen.  Myelosuppression prevented an escalation of the administered Y-90 activity above 25 mCi.  Y-90-labeled antibody was absorbed from the peritoneal cavity into the circulation.  Maximum blood Y-90 activity was observed 40 hours after the IP injection with a mean of 21% of the injected activity (range, 14.2% to 26.4%) in the circulation.  The radiation dose the bone marrow received from circulating Y-90-labeled antibody (the blood radiation dose) was calculated by applying the Medical Internal Radiation Dose (MIRD) formulation to the measured Y-90 activity in patients blood.  Myelosuppression occurred following calculated blood radiation doses to bone marrow of only 10 to 30 cGy.  The excessive myelosuppression following such modest radiation doses from circulating Y-90-labeled antibody could be explained by the uptake of Y-90 by bone.  In an attempt to reduce bone absorption of Y-90, seven patients received an intravenous (IV) infusion of EDTA (Sinclair Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Godalming, United Kingdom).  This increased the urinary excretion of Y-90 from a mean of 11.1% to 32.3% of the injected activity (P = .0001).  Fourteen patients had assessable tumor at laparoscopy.  Tumor regression was observed in one patient, and palliation of ascites in a further patient.
Pediatric osteosarcoma: therapeutic strategies, results, and prognostic factors derived from a 10-year experience.  Ninety-eight pediatric patients were treated with three separate protocols (Treatment and investigation of Osteosarcoma [TIOS] I, II, and III) and 47 developed recurrent disease (metastases and/or local recurrence).  Actuarial overall disease-free survival (hereafter designated survival) was 43%.  Over 90% of the patients were treated initially with preoperative intraarterial cisplatin (CDP).  Postoperative chemotherapeutic regimens comprised high-dose methotrexate with leucovorin rescue (MTX-CF), Adriamycin [( ADR] doxorubicin; Adria Laboratories, Columbus, OH), and cyclophosphamide.  Primary definitive treatment comprised amputation or limb salvage (TIOS I and TIOS III).  Patients treated with preoperative CDP and surgery (TIOS I and III) had a 62% survival.  Patients in TIOS II refused surgical extirpation; they were treated exclusively with chemotherapy and had a 23% survival.  Survival in patients treated with amputation was 55% and limb salvage 58%.  Prognostic factors considered significant in relation to development of pulmonary metastases comprised tumor burden (P = .04) and the percentage of tumor necrosis induced by preoperative chemotherapy (P = .01).  Histopathologic subtype was marginally significant: chondroblastic was more favorable as opposed to osteoblastic (P = .05).  These findings are compared with results and prognostic factors published in the literature.
Phase II study of fluorouracil and recombinant interferon alfa-2a in previously untreated advanced colorectal carcinoma.  We conducted a phase II clinical trial of fluorouracil (5FU) and recombinant interferon alfa-2a (rIFN alpha-2a) in 52 previously untreated patients with bidimensionally measurable metastatic colorectal cancer.  During week 1, 5FU was administered as a continuous intravenous infusion, 750 mg/m2/d for 5 consecutive days.  Intravenous bolus administration of 5FU 750 mg/m2 was given weekly for 7 weeks starting on day 12.  rIFN alpha-2a (Roferon; Hoffman-LaRoche, Nutley, NJ), 9 x 10(6) U, was administered subcutaneously three times weekly during weeks 1 to 8.  Patients were evaluated for response on week 9.  Of 52 patients enrolled in the study, 51 were assessable for toxicity, and 45 were assessable for response.  Fifteen patients experienced partial response, and one patient achieved a clinical complete response for an overall response rate of 35% (95% confidence interval [CI], 22%, 50%).  Median duration of response is 7.5 months (range, 4 to 11 months).  Seventy percent of patients entered on the study are alive with a median follow-up duration of 7 months.  Twenty-five percent of patients developed grade 4 toxicity, and 82% developed grade 3 toxicity.  One drug-related death in the presence of sepsis was reported, and two treatment-related seizures occurred.  Our experience with this schedule produced a lower response rate with greater toxicity than previously reported.  Current randomized trials comparing this schedule of 5FU with rIFN alpha-2a to 5FU plus folinic acid (leucovorin) or single-agent 5FU may determine its role in the treatment of advanced colorectal carcinomas.
Adjuvant cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil in patients with axillary node-positive breast cancer: an update of the Guy's/Manchester trial.  Between 1976 and 1985, 391 patients (202 premenopausal, 189 postmenopausal) with operable breast cancer and positive axillary lymph nodes were randomized after total mastectomy and axillary clearance to receive cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil (CMF) (n = 193) or no adjuvant therapy (n = 198).  After a median follow-up of 8 years, both relapse-free survival (RFS) and survival (S) were significantly prolonged in premenopausal patients receiving CMF (RFS, P less than .001; S, P = .003).  Treatment with CMF resulted in a significant improvement in RFS in premenopausal patients both with steroid receptor-positive and steroid receptor-negative tumors and also in subgroups of premenopausal patients defined by the number of axillary nodes involved.  Premenopausal patients who developed permanent amenorrhea following CMF had a significantly better RFS than those who continued to menstruate.  Induction of amenorrhea following CMF was related to age, with almost all patients over 40 years becoming amenorrheic.  For patients less than or equal to 40 years, development of amenorrhea following CMF did not influence outcome.  No difference was detected between control and CMF groups (RFS, P = .9; S, P = .9) in postmenopausal patients nor in any subgroup of these patients.  The results of this trial of the efficacy of CMF for improving RFS and S have strengthened with longer follow-up.
Node-negative breast cancer: prognostic subgroups defined by tumor size and flow cytometry   Adjuvant systemic therapy for women with node-negative breast cancer is most easily justified for those patients at highest risk of relapse.  We have examined the impact of tumor size, histologic grade, estrogen receptor (ER) status, tumor ploidy, and S-phase fraction (SPF) on relapse-free survival (RFS) for 169 patients with node-negative breast cancer in order to identify groups of patients at high and low risk of relapse.  Patients with small tumors (less than or equal to 1.0 cm) had a significantly better RFS than those with larger tumors (P = .005), with 96% remaining relapse-free at 5 years.  Patients with tumors less than or equal to 1.0 cm were thus excluded from analysis when attempting to define a group with a poor prognosis.  Within the group of patients with tumors greater than 1.0 cm, tumor ploidy (P = .63), ER status (P = .3), or progesterone receptor (PgR) status (P = .24) did not predict for RFS.  Patients with grade 1 or 2 infiltrating ductal tumors had a significantly better prognosis than those with grade 3 tumors (P = .04).  The prognostic factor that gave the widest separation between subgroups, however, was SPF.  Patients whose tumors were greater than 1.0 cm with an SPF less than or equal to 10% had a 5-year RFS of 78% compared with a 5-year RFS of 52% for those with an SPF greater than 10% (P = .006).  We have combined tumor size and SPF to identify three prognostic groups: (1) tumor less than or equal to 1.0 cm, 5-year RFS 96%; (2) tumor greater than 1.0 cm plus SPF less than or equal to 10%, 5-year RFS 78%; 3) tumor greater than 1.0 cm plus SPF greater than 10%, 5-year RFS 52%.  These prognostic groupings may help identify patients most suitable for adjuvant therapy.
Drug-induced DNA damage and tumor chemosensitivity.  Cytotoxic drugs act principally by damaging tumor-cell DNA.  Quantitative analysis of this interaction provides a basis for understanding the biology of therapeutic cell kill as well as a rational strategy for optimizing and predicting tumor response.  Recent advances have made it possible to correlate assayed DNA lesions with cytotoxicity in tumor cell lines, in animal models, and in patients with malignant disease.  In addition, many of the complex interrelationships between DNA damage, DNA repair, and alterations of gene expression in response to DNA damage have been defined.  Techniques for modulating DNA damage and cytotoxicity using schedule-specific cytotoxic combinations, DNA repair inhibitors, cell-cycle manipulations, and adjunctive noncytotoxic drug therapy are being developed, and critical therapeutic targets have been identified within tumor-cell subpopulations and genomic DNA alike.  Most importantly, methods for predicting clinical response to cytotoxic therapy using both in vitro markers of tumor-cell sensitivity and in vivo measurements of drug-induced DNA damage are now becoming a reality.  These advances can be expected to provide a strong foundation for the development of innovative cytotoxic drug strategies over the next decade.
Motility factor produced by malignant glioma cells: role in tumor invasion.  To better understand the cellular mechanism of tumor invasion, the production of a cell motility-stimulating factor by malignant glioma cells was studied in vitro.  Serum-free conditioned media from cultures of rat C6 and human T98G cell lines contained a factor that stimulated the locomotion of the producer cells.  This factor was termed the "glioma-derived motility factor." The glioma-derived motility factor is a heat-labile protein with a molecular weight greater than 10 kD and has relative stability to acid.  The factor showed not only chemotactic activity but also chemokinetic (stimulated random locomotion) activity in the two types of glioma cells studied.  Although glioma-derived motility factors in conditioned media obtained from two different cell origins are likely to be the same, chemokinetic migration of T98G cells to their conditioned medium was much stronger than that of C6 cells to theirs.  Coincubation of cells with cytochalasin B, which disrupts the assembly of cellular actin microfilaments, almost completely inhibited the cell migration stimulated by glioma-derived motility factor.  Cytochalasin B also induced marked alterations in cell morphology, including cell retraction and arborization, while the drug did not affect cell attachment to culture dishes.  These results indicate that glioma cells produce a motility factor which may play a role particularly when tumor cells are detached and migrate away from the original tumor mass, thus promoting tumor invasion.  Also, glioma cell migration stimulated by the motility factor requires the normal organization of cytoskeletons such as actin microfilaments.
Antigen related to cell proliferation in malignant gliomas recognized by a human monoclonal antibody.  A human monoclonal antibody (CLN-IgG) was produced from a human-human hybridoma derived from lymphocytes of a patient with cervical carcinoma.  The reactivities of this antibody with various human glioma tissues and cultured glioma cells and the characterization of the antigen recognized by CLN-IgG on malignant glioma cells were analyzed and reported.  CLN-IgG reacted with various human glioma cells and glioma tissues, especially glioblastoma, but did not react with normal brain tissues or fetal brain tissues.  A large amount of antigen recognized by CLN-IgG was expressed on cell membranes of undifferentiated glioma cells and of glioma cells at the G2/M tumor growth phase in cycling cells.  Antigen recognized by CLN-IgG was detected in only one of seven samples of cyst fluid, and was not detected in 27 serum samples or 18 samples of cerebrospinal fluid from glioma patients.  CLN-IgG exhibited antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity against U-25 1 MG glioma cells and primary cultured cells of glioblastomas and anaplastic astrocytomas.  These data suggest that the antigen recognized by CLN-IgG might be related to cell proliferation in malignant gliomas.  Thus, CLN-IgG might be useful for immunotherapy or immunoimaging of malignant gliomas.
Immunoscintigraphy of ovarian cancer with indium-111-labeled OV-TL 3 F(ab')2 monoclonal antibody.  The safety and diagnostic accuracy of immunoscintigraphy with the indium-111-labeled monoclonal antibody OV-TL 3 F(ab')2(111In-OV-TL 3 F(ab')2) for diagnosis and follow-up of ovarian cancer was prospectively studied in 31 patients.  Planar and SPECT scintigraphy were performed up to 4 days after i.v.  injection of 140 MBq 111In-OV-TL 3 F(ab')2.  Surgical evaluation was possible in 22 out of 31 patients.  Imaging results were compared with X-ray computed tomography, ultrasound, and CA 125 serum level using the histologically confirmed surgical findings as a "gold standard." Apart from a transient rash observed in two patients, no other immediate or delayed adverse reactions were observed.  Within the surgically evaluated group, ovarian cancer lesions were detected in 16 out of 17 patients (94%).  Of 45 distinct tumor deposits found at operation, 67% were detected and localized with immunoscintigraphy while X-ray computed tomography and ultrasound visualized 53% and 23%, respectively.
The potential of 2-deoxy-2[18F]fluoro-D-glucose (FDG) for the detection of tumor involvement in lymph nodes.  To assess the potential of FDG for PET imaging of nodal tumor metastases, we evaluated its uptake into normal lymph nodes, tumor-involved lymph nodes, and subcutaneous tumor xenografts in rodents.  Normal lymph nodes in mice and rats accumulate FDG moderately, developing node/blood ratios of 1.3-11.9/1 at 2 hr following i.v.  injection.  By contrast, FDG given subcutaneously to healthy Sprague Dawley rats developed very high normal draining lymph node/blood ratios (272/1) versus 7.7/1 by i.v.  injection.  In nude mice, subcutaneous human ovarian cancer xenografts had 1.27-fold more uptake relative to blood than did normal popliteal lymph nodes.  Subcutaneous tumor xenografts of rat breast cancer developed tumor/normal node uptake ratios of 4.91 +/- 0.43/1 and tumor/blood ratios of 6.6 +/- 0.9 at 2 hr postinjection.  Mouse nodes involved with 38C13 murine B-cell lymphoma had mean node/blood ratios of 42.9 +/- 6.7/1 and tumored node/normal lymph node uptake of 6.3/1.  Thus, FDG given intravenously but not subcutaneusly (due to high normal nodal uptake) has potential as an agent for the detection of metastatic tumors in regional lymph nodes using PET scanning.
Radioimmunoscintigraphy using iodine-131-anti-CEA monoclonal antibodies and thallium-201 scintigraphy in medullary thyroid carcinoma: a case report.  This case report demonstrates the use of thallium-201 (201Tl) scans versus iodine-131- (131l) anti-CEA F(ab')2 scans in a patient with high serum CEA levels due to metastases of medullary thyroid carcinoma in the suprarenal region and sacroiliacal region.  Scintigraphy using monoclonal antibodies directed against CEA showed a higher tumor uptake (0.26% dose and 0.64% dose, respectively) than a thallium scan and is believed to be promising for future radiotherapeutic applications.
Treatment planning for internal radionuclide therapy: three-dimensional dosimetry for nonuniformly distributed radionuclides.  A calculational approach is described that provides the spatially varying radiation absorbed dose, presented as isodose contours superimposed on CT images, from nonuniform and/or irregular cumulated activity distributions.  CT images are read from magnetic tape and are displayed on a high-resolution color graphics display monitor.  Source tissue geometries are defined on a series of contiguous CT images automatically (by an edge detection algorithm) or manually (using a trackball), thereby obtaining a three-dimensional representation of the various source volumes of activity.  Dose calculations are performed using a radionuclide-specific absorbed dose point kernel in the form of a lookup table.  The method described yields the spatially varying dose delivered to tumor and normal tissue volumes from a patient-specific cumulated activity distribution in a clinically implementable manner.  This level of accuracy in determining normal tissue and tumor doses may prove valuable in the evaluation and implementation of radionuclides and radiolabeled compounds for therapeutic purposes.
Implementation of cancer prevention guidelines in clinical practice.  Data from several sources, including consumer surveys, physician surveys, and medical record audits, indicate that consumers do not receive cancer screening tests as recommended by the National Cancer Institute, the American Cancer Society, and the U.S.  Preventive Services Task Force.  Performance rates are consistently below published standards for all tests except Pap tests.  Major reasons physicians do not perform the recommended tests include physician forgetfulness, disagreement with recommendations, lack of time, and patient refusal.  Physicians also tend to overestimate their own performance rates.  Barriers to screening test performance can be categorized into patient factors, physician factors, test factors, and health care delivery system factors.  Interventions, such as computerized reminder systems, physician audits with feedback, and patient education and reminders, can be effective in promoting performance of such screening.  Interventions that target both physician and patient may be particularly effective.
Breast cancer screening: who should be included?  The recommendations of the U.S.  Preventive Services Task Force are reviewed in regard to screening for breast cancer.  In contradistinction to those issued by some other national organizations, screening for breast cancer using mammography at ages 40-49 is not recommended.  It is concluded that the scientific evidence is insufficient at present to recommend mammography screening for women aged 40-49.  The recommendations of the task force are: all women over age 40 should receive an annual breast examination; all women should have mammography every one or two years beginning at age 50 and concluding at approximately age 75 unless disease has been detected; and it may be prudent to begin mammography at an earlier age for women at high risk of breast cancer.  These recommendations are appropriate in light of the available evidence; though at present there is no evidence that clinical examination of the breasts at any age reduces breast cancer mortality; the upper age beyond which breast cancer screening no longer has a significant effect in reducing breast cancer mortality is unknown; and there is no evidence that women at high risk for breast cancer benefit to a different degree from screening than women not at high risk.
Colorectal cancer: have we identified an effective screening strategy?  Three currently used screening methods are aimed at detecting colorectal cancer when it is asymptomatic and curable, and at detecting polyps so that they can be removed before they can progress to cancer.  Digital rectal examinations are relatively cheap and easy but can detect only a small fraction of large-bowel cancers.  Sigmoidoscopy is more sensitive, but its low acceptability to patients has been only partially mitigated by the introduction of the 35-cm flexible instrument.  Fecal occult blood testing has limited sensitivity because blood from cancers and polyps is neither continuously shed nor uniformly distributed in feces; specificity and positive predictive value are also low because of other sources of blood in the stool.  Prudent judgment suggests that all of these screening tests may prevent death from colorectal cancer in some patients.  However, none has been proven effective in general use by well-controlled studies.  Case-control studies can provide timely and valuable new evidence in this regard; the authors' investigations in progress are described.  The current lack of strong evidence in support of these screening tests should not be interpreted as evidence against their use.
The impact of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force guidelines on cancer screening: perspective from the National Cancer Institute.  The U.S.  Preventive Services Task Force evaluated the medical literature, utilizing strict criteria to judge the merits of experimental trials designed to show benefit in screening for cancer.  For individuals at normal risk, the task force was not able to make recommendations for or against screening for colorectal, prostate, skin, oral, or testicular cancers.  Only one physical-examination cancer-screening procedure has ever been tested in a randomized trial.  During the past 27 years, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) has funded six randomized screening trials.  Thus far, only one has shown a decrease in mortality.  Recognizing the limitations of such trials, the NCI published "Working Guidelines for Early Cancer Detection." Designed for the practicing physician, these guidelines were based upon the best available evidence and on the judgment of representatives of medical professional organizations.
Squamous cell carcinoma-antigen for detection of squamous cell and mucoepidermoid carcinoma after primary treatment: a preliminary report.  This study evaluated the efficacy of using the periodic measurement of the serum level of squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC-antigen) for determining the local recurrence and/or metastasis of squamous cell and mucoepidermoid carcinomas after primary treatment.  It was found that at the time of clinical recognition of recurrence, the SCC-antigen level was normal, but metastasis to regional lymph nodes or to remote organs generally was accompanied by an increase of SCC-antigen.  Changes in the SCC-antigen level with mucoepidermoid carcinoma seemed to be less sensitive than with squamous cell carcinoma.
Interaction between trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and methotrexate in children with leukemia.  Because trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) causes neutropenia in children with leukemia, we investigated the possibility that pharmacokinetic interaction between methotrexate (MTX) and TMP-SMX causes accumulation of the antileukemia agent.  We studied the pharmacokinetics of MTX given intravenously or orally to nine children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, once with and once without TMP-SMX.  There was an increase in free MTX fraction during TMP-SMX therapy in all patients, from (mean +/- SD) 37.4 +/- 11% without TMP-SMX to 52.2 +/- 6.4% with TMP-SMX (p less than 0.01).  Plasma clearance of total MTX did not change significantly, whereas clearance of free MTX decreased significantly (from 12.5 +/- 4 to 7.6 +/- 1.5 ml/kg/min; p less than 0.05).  There was a consistent decrease in the renal clearance of free MTX (from 12.1 +/- 6.8 to 5.6 +/- 2.4 ml/kg/min; p less than 0.05).  Elimination half-life of MTX was not affected significantly by TMP-SMX.  There was a significant correlation between serum concentrations of TMP-SMX and the percentage of decrease in the renal clearance of free MTX (r = 0.91; p less than 0.05).  These changes in protein binding and tubular clearance of MTX, caused by competition with TMP-SMX, result in a mean 66% increase in systemic exposure to MTX and may explain the myelotoxicity often observed with the coadministration of the two drugs.
Laparoscopic management of ovarian cysts.  One hundred two women with ovarian cysts were managed laparoscopically over a 13-year period.  Thirteen were treated with laparoscopic inspection followed by laparotomy, 6 with laparoscopic fine needle aspiration followed by laparotomy and 83 with laparoscopic fenestration and biopsy, with or without coagulation or removal of the cyst lining.  Satisfactory results were noted in patients treated completely with laparoscopy.  Only 1 of 56 functional, simple or paraovarian cysts recurred during the study period.  Two of the 18 ovarian endometriomas treated with fenestration and coagulation or removal of the lining recurred, whereas 8 of 9 such lesions recurred when treated with fenestration alone.  There were no surgical complications.
Expression of the MDR1 gene in human gastric and colorectal carcinomas.  We measured expression of the MDR1 gene (also known as the PGY1 gene) in the human gastrointestinal tract.  MDR1 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels were elevated in 13 of 15 colorectal carcinoma specimens and in six of 13 gastric carcinoma specimens.  Well-differentiated colorectal carcinomas contained significantly higher concentrations of MDR1 mRNA than moderately differentiated colorectal carcinomas.  Similarly, moderately differentiated gastric carcinomas contained higher concentrations of MDR1 mRNA than poorly differentiated gastric carcinomas.  MDR1 gene expression in normal colorectal and gastric tissues adjacent to carcinomas was similar to that in the carcinomas.  MDR1 gene expression in xenografts of colorectal and gastric carcinomas in nude mice was also investigated.  Elevated expression of the MDR1 gene was seen in only four of 18 xenografts of colorectal carcinoma and was not seen in any xenografts of gastric carcinoma.  P-glycoprotein was distributed over the luminal surface of the colorectal carcinoma.  These results imply that the higher levels of MDR1 mRNA found in well-differentiated carcinomas derived from colorectal tissues are the results of increased expression of the MDR1 gene in the luminal surface cells.  The level of expression of the MDR1 gene in colorectal and gastric carcinomas appears to correlate with the degree of differentiation and also appears to be affected by transplantation into nude mice.
Race, nutritional status, and survival from breast cancer.  The effects of nutritional status on differences in the survival of black and white women with breast cancer were studied in a cohort of 1,960 Georgia women diagnosed during 1975-1979.  After data were adjusted for stage of disease, socioeconomic status, and other prognostic factors, poorer survival rates were shown in black women.  Within each stage classification, lower levels of serum albumin and hemoglobin and higher relative body weight were more common among blacks and were independently associated with poorer survival.  Among women with stage 3 disease, adjustment for these variables substantially reduced the excess mortality rate among blacks, suggesting that racial differences in survival may be partly explained by differences in nutritional status or extent of disease within stage.
Effect of tamoxifen on serum insulinlike growth factor I levels in stage I breast cancer patients.  Insulinlike growth factor I (IGF-I) has been shown to be a potent mitogen for breast cancer cells in vitro, and IGF-I receptors have been demonstrated on human primary breast neoplasms.  In a randomized, placebo-controlled study, we document that administration of the antiestrogen tamoxifen to patients with breast cancer was associated with a statistically significant (P = .002) reduction in the serum level of IGF-I.  The mean IGF-I level was 1.4 U/mL in the placebo-treated group and 0.9 U/mL in the tamoxifen-treated group.  Because serum IGF-I level is growth hormone (GH) dependent and because data suggest that the pubertal surge in GH and IGF-I levels is sex steroid dependent, we speculate that the mechanism underlying our observation may involve blockade by tamoxifen of estrogen action in the hypothalamic-pituitary axis.  We conclude that tamoxifen treatment reduces IGF-I levels and that this reduction may contribute to the therapeutic effect of the drug.
Reduction of the membrane fluidity of human breast cancer cells by tamoxifen and 17 beta-estradiol.  The intracellular steady-state levels of methotrexate were previously shown to be reduced in estrogen receptor (ER)-negative human breast cancer MDA-MB-436 cells and ER-positive human breast cancer MCF7 cells following treatment with pharmacologically relevant concentrations of 17 beta-estradiol (E2).  We now report that both E2 and tamoxifen (TMX) significantly decreased the fluidity of MCF7 and MDA-MB-436 cellular membranes.  With E2 or TMX at concentrations greater than 1 microM, perturbations in membrane fluidity were accompanied by apparently non-ER-mediated cytotoxicity.  Alterations in membrane structure may have contributed to the cytotoxicity of high-dose endocrine therapy and to the ability of E2 to inhibit methotrexate transport and cytotoxicity in some human breast cancer cells.
Antitumor activity of liposome-encapsulated doxorubicin in advanced breast cancer: phase II study.  Previous studies in animals have demonstrated liposome-encapsulated doxorubicin (LED) has substantially less cardiac toxicity than free doxorubicin but retains antitumor activity.  In a phase I clinical study of LED, the maximum tolerated dose was 90 mg/m2 and dose-limiting toxicity was considered to have been reached when granulocytopenia was produced.  We used LED to treat 20 patients with advanced, measurable breast cancer.  LED was given at doses of 60-75 mg/m2 every 3 weeks as an intravenous infusion.  Regression of disease was objectively measured in nine patients; in five of these patients, complete regression of the index lesion occurred.  The mean duration of the responses was 7 months.  Hematologic toxicity consisted of grade 1-2 leukopenia in some patients.  Gastrointestinal toxicity and mucositis were generally mild and tolerable.  Alopecia occurred in all patients and usually was complete.  Twelve patients received cumulative doses of LED of greater than 400 mg/m2 and were evaluated with radionuclide ventriculograms.  In eight patients, the cumulative dose was greater than 500 mg/m2, and five had endomyocardial biopsies.  Four of these biopsy results were Billingham grade 0, while one (cumulative LED dose, 750 mg/m2) showed grade 1 changes with mild myofibrillar loss and dilatation of the sarcoplasmic reticulum involving less than 5% of cardiac myocytes.  Two patients had decreases in left ventricular ejection fraction.  One of these patients had received a total dose of LED of 630 mg/m2 and had a decline of 13% in left ventricular ejection fraction, but had no clinical evidence of congestive heart failure and had a Billingham grade 0 endomyocardial biopsy.
Oral zidovudine, continuous-infusion fluorouracil, and oral leucovorin calcium: a phase I study.  A phase I clinical, pharmacologic, and biochemical evaluation of escalating oral zidovudine (AZT) given over 2 days with a fixed dose of continuous-infusion fluorouracil (800 mg/m2 per day X 3 days) and oral leucovorin calcium was performed.  Eighteen patients were treated with doses of AZT ranging from 1.0 to 9.0 g/m2 per day.  Nausea and vomiting were dose limiting, with a maximally tolerated dose of 7.5 g/m2 per day.  Rash and mucositis occurred but were not dose limiting.  A dose-related increase in peak plasma levels of AZT was observed, and the alpha half-life of AZT in plasma (75 min) was unaffected by these high doses.  At doses above 4.0 g/m2 per day, trough levels significantly increased, perhaps reflecting prolonged absorption from the gut.  No responses were observed; however, a significant increase in DNA single-strand breaks was observed in peripheral blood cells after a threshold dose of 4.0 g/m2 per day, confirming a biological effect of AZT in this regimen.  Further trials with an intravenous formulation capable of maintaining plasma levels and circumventing dose-limiting toxicity are warranted.
Validation of intermediate end points in cancer research.  Investigations using intermediate end points as cancer surrogates are quicker, smaller, and less expensive than studies that use malignancy as the end point.  We present a strategy for determining whether a given biomarker is a valid intermediate end point between an exposure and incidence of cancer.  Candidate intermediate end points may be selected from case series, ecologic studies, and animal experiments.  Prospective cohort and sometimes case-control studies may be used to quantify the intermediate end point-cancer association.  The most appropriate measure of this association is the attributable proportion.  The intermediate end point is a valid cancer surrogate if the attributable proportion is close to 1.0, but not if it is close to 0.  Usually, the attributable proportion is close to neither 1.0 nor 0; in this case, valid surrogacy requires that the intermediate end point mediate an established exposure-cancer relation.  This would in turn imply that the exposure effect would vanish if adjusted for the intermediate end point.  We discuss the relative advantages of intervention and observational studies for the validation of intermediate end points.  This validation strategy also may be applied to intermediate end points for adverse reproductive outcomes and chronic diseases other than cancer.
Anti-idiotype monoclonal antibody carrying the internal image of ganglioside GM3.  Murine anti-idiotype monoclonal antibodies were generated against a human IgM monoclonal antibody (L612) that recognizes ganglioside GM3 on human melanoma.  Hybridomas secreting antibodies that bound specifically to L612 were selected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay using L612 and three negative control human IgMs, including monoclonal anti-GM2 and anti-GD2 antibodies, as well as purified serum IgM, as antigen sources.  GM3-binding inhibition and cell-binding inhibition assays were used to identify seven anti-idiotype monoclonal antibodies that recognized determinants located within the antigen-combining sites of L612.  To determine whether these anti-idiotype monoclonal antibodies possessed the internal image of the original antigen, we immunized syngeneic BALB/c mice with one of the anti-idiotype monoclonal antibodies, 4C10, coupled with keyhole limpet hemocyanin.  Sera from the immunized mice reacted strongly with an antigen-positive M12 melanoma cell line and with purified GM3.  Because L612 detects and kills melanoma tumor cells in vitro and in vivo in the presence of complement without affecting normal tissues, anti-idiotype monoclonal antibodies carrying the internal image of GM3 may be an effective tool for active specific immunotherapy in patients with melanoma.
Mutagen sensitivity in patients with head and neck cancers: a biologic marker for risk of multiple primary malignancies.  Eighty-four patients with head and neck cancers were evaluated for in vitro sensitivity to mutagens and then followed longitudinally for development of multiple primary malignancies.  We assessed mutagen sensitivity by exposing lymphocytes to bleomycin in vitro and quantitating the bleomycin-induced chromosomal breaks per cell.  The mutagen-hypersensitive patients, ie, those who expressed greater than 1.0 break per cell, were significantly more likely to develop multiple primary cancers than were patients who were less sensitive (less than or equal to 1.0 break per cell) (relative risk = 4.4; 95% confidence limits = 1.2, 15.8).  This relationship was independent of age, sex, site, and treatment of first primary cancer and tobacco or alcohol exposures.  Sensitivity to bleomycin-induced chromosomal damage serves as an indicator of genetic susceptibility to multiple primary malignancies in patients with head and neck cancers.
Total pelvic exenteration with simultaneous bowel and urinary reconstruction.  The technique of total pelvic exenteration with simultaneous bowel and urinary reconstruction is described as a surgical option for the management of pelvic sarcoma in adults and for highly selected patients with other types of advanced pelvic malignancy.  The surgical technique is presented in detail as performed in a 43-year-old man who presented with extensive primitive pelvic sarcoma.  We believe that this approach may provide the benefits of an exenterative operation without the undesirable psychosocial sequelae of a permanent colostomy and external urinary diversion.
Prospective study of estrogen replacement therapy and risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women [published erratum appears in JAMA 1991 Apr 10;265(14):1828]   We prospectively examined the use of estrogen replacement therapy in relation to breast cancer incidence in a cohort of women 30 to 55 years of age in 1976.  During 367 187 person-years of follow-up among postmenopausal women, 722 incident cases of breast cancer were documented.  Overall, past users of replacement estrogen were not at increased risk (relative risk, 0.98; 95% confidence interval, 0.81 to 1.18), including even those with more than 10 years since last [corrected] use (relative risk after adjustment for established risk factors, 0.70; 95% confidence interval, 0.45 to 1.10).  However, the risk of breast cancer was significantly elevated among current users (relative risk, 1.36; 95% confidence interval, 1.11 to 1.67).  Among current users, a stronger relationship was observed with increasing age but not with increasing duration of use.  These data suggest that long-term past use of estrogen replacement therapy is not related to risk of breast cancer but that current use may modestly increase risk.
Preoperative cell-mediated immune function and the prognosis of patients with gastric carcinoma.  The cell-mediated immune function of 83 patients with gastric carcinoma was assessed preoperatively and the results were compared to that of 52 patients with benign lesions.  The data were subjected to an analysis in order to evaluate their prognostic significance.  The abilities to induce allogeneic cytotoxicity and to produce interleukin 2 (IL2) in patients with stage IV carcinoma were significantly depressed, as compared to those in patients with benign lesions, whereas natural killer (NK) cell activity was not significantly impaired.  There was no significant correlation among these immune functions.  When the patients were stratified into two groups, those who had high (greater than the mean value in patients with benign lesions) and low (less than the same value) values of these immune reactivities, the survival of patients with high NK activity (greater than or equal to 43%) was significantly better, as compared to that of patients with low cytotoxicity (less than 43%).  However, there was no correlation between the survival and allogeneic cytotoxicity in these patients.  The high ability to produce IL2 (greater than or equal to 1.3 U/ml) correlated with the better survival in the patients, but not in the group of patients who underwent curative resection.
Neoadjuvant Cis-DDP in esophageal cancers: an experience at a regional cancer centre, India.  We are analysing the results of 80 patients who underwent surgery during 1983-84 for esophageal cancer.  Forty patients who received pre-operative single agent Cis-DDP were grouped under "A" and 40 patients who went for surgery directly were grouped under "B".  Twenty-two patients (55%) of Group A showed tumor necrosis.  Both groups underwent resection and hand-sewn anastamosis of the esophagus.  There were 10 post-operative deaths among 80 resected cases, 9 of them being from anastomatic leak.  Cis-DDP has induced negligible side effects.  A comparatively high survival rate during early years in patients who responded to Cis-DDP suggests that neoadjuvant chemotherapy might be of value.
In vivo selection and characterization of a murine mammary tumor subline with high potential for spontaneous lymph node metastasis.  A transplantable mammary adenocarcinoma, grown in Balb/c mice, with a marked enhancement in its draining lymph node metastatic ability (MM3LN), was obtained through an in vivo procedure from a variant tumor moderately metastatic to lymph nodes (MM3).  Both MM3 and MM3LN presented a similar latency and tumor growth rate and reached the same tumor mean diameter at death.  MM3LN tumor-bearing mice exhibited a larger mean survival time.  The new variant showed a 2.5-fold higher incidence of tumor-draining lymph node metastases than MM3 line, with no differences in the incidence of lung metastases.  Morphology as well as cytogenetic and in vitro adhesion properties were studied in order to characterize the new subline.  This murine tumor model has potential application in the study of the metastatic process in lymphoid tissue.
Ampullary carcinoma in patients under 50 years of age with a poor prognosis.  Clinicopathologic features of 145 Japanese patients with ampullary carcinoma were compared among three age groups.  The 145 patients were divided into three groups by the patient's age at the time of operation; there were 24 patients in group I (younger) aged less than or equal to 50 years, 99 in group II (ordinary) aged 51-69, and 22 in group III (elderly) aged greater than or equal to 70.  The three groups showed no significant difference in sex, icterus, duration of icterus, size of the tumor, year of operation, macroscopic type, histopathologic type, tumor margin, lymphatic permeation, venous invasion, or pancreatic invasion.  The survival curve of group I was worse than those of groups II and III.  Multivariate regression analysis using 11 prognostic variables failed to reveal that the age of the patient at the time of operation was an independent factor.  The younger patients aged less than or equal to 50 fared worse than the elderly patients aged greater than or equal to 70, because the group I tumors included a significantly greater number of advanced ampullary carcinoma with more frequent perineural invasion than did the group III tumors.
Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration: a clinical comparison of patients with and without Purkinje cell cytoplasmic antibodies.  In a review of 32 patients with paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration (PCD), 16 (all of whom were women) had Purkinje cell cytoplasmic antibodies (PCAb) and 16 (8 women) did not.  Most patients (15 of 16 seropositive and 12 of 16 seronegative patients) had active cancer at the time of neurologic diagnosis.  Gynecologic or breast cancers were found in 14 of 16 seropositive and in 2 of 8 seronegative female patients; lung cancer was diagnosed in 7 of 16 seronegative patients but in no seropositive patient.  In seropositive patients, the onset of the syndrome was more often abrupt and abnormalities of affect, mentation, ocular motility, and cerebrospinal fluid IgG index were more common than in seronegative patients.  Additional paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes were present in five seronegative patients but in no seropositive patient.  Clinical impairment was equivalent in both groups; approximately 75% of patients were confined to a wheelchair or bed at last follow-up.  Four of 16 seropositive patients died (4 to 18 months after onset of PCD), and 7 of 16 seronegative patients died (7 to 120 months after onset of PCD).  Thus, PCAb seem to be a marker for a clinical subset of female patients with gynecologic or breast cancer.  The high frequency of other autoimmune paraneoplastic syndromes in patients with seronegative PCD suggests that PCD in both seropositive and seronegative patients may have a common pathogenic basis that involves an as yet unidentified antineuronal autoimmune mechanism.
1990 Ogura memorial lecture: moral dilemmas in head and neck cancer.  Neither morality nor dilemma can be defined meaningfully in the concept of the practical management of head and neck cancer.  Although both have important implications, particularly with regard to ethnic and social factors, they play a relatively minor role in determining management policy.  With little knowledge of the intrinsic causes of cancer and with a treatment strategy limited to radiotherapy and surgery, our desire for cure must be tempered by concern to avoid any increase in patient privations.  My philosophy, based upon the care of more than 3500 patients over almost 30 years, reflects some of the difficulties of applying the concept "do nothing that may cause harm," while offering each patient the opportunity for long-term cure.
Carcinoma of the external auditory canal: an update.  This review is a continuation of the series of 35 cases of carcinoma of the external auditory canal originally reported by the senior author and colleagues.  Eighteen additional cases have been evaluated and treated since 1976.  Preoperative high-resolution computed tomographic scanning has replaced polytomography, and improved surgical skull base approaches have allowed for extended resections of advanced lesions.  A revised classification for local and extensive lesions is presented.  The prognosis for localized tumors treated by en bloc resection remains excellent, whereas prognosis for extensive lesions might be more dependent on histologic type and grade of tumor.
Relation of meat, fat, and fiber intake to the risk of colon cancer in a prospective study among women.  BACKGROUND.  The rates of colon cancer in various countries are strongly correlated with the per capita consumption of red meat and animal fat and, to a lesser degree, inversely associated with the consumption of fiber.  METHODS.  We conducted a prospective study among 88,751 women 34 to 59 years old and without a history of cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, or familial polyposis who completed a dietary questionnaire in 1980.  By 1986, during 512,488 person-years of follow-up, 150 incident cases of colon cancer had been documented.  RESULTS.  After adjustment for total energy intake, animal fat was positively associated with the risk of colon cancer (P for trend = 0.01); the relative risk for the highest as compared with the lowest quintile was 1.89 (95 percent confidence interval, 1.13 to 3.15).  No association was found for vegetable fat.  The relative risk of colon cancer in women who ate beef, pork, or lamb as a main dish every day was 2.49 (95 percent confidence interval, 1.24 to 5.03), as compared with those reporting consumption less than once a month.  Processed meats and liver were also significantly associated with increased risk, whereas fish and chicken without skin were related to decreased risk.  The ratio of the intake of red meat to the intake of chicken and fish was particularly strongly associated with an increased incidence of colon cancer (P for trend = 0.0005); the relative risk for women in the highest quintile of this ratio as compared with those in the lowest quintile was 2.49 (95 percent confidence interval, 1.50 to 4.13).  A low intake of fiber from fruits appeared to contribute to the risk of colon cancer, but this relation was not statistically independent of meat intake.  CONCLUSIONS.  These prospective data provide evidence for the hypothesis that a high intake of animal fat increases the risk of colon cancer, and they support existing recommendations to substitute fish and chicken for meats high in fat.
Overall mortality and cancer mortality around French nuclear sites   Higher than expected mortality from leukaemia has been observed in the population under age 25 living around Sellafield and Dounreay, nuclear reprocessing plants in the United Kingdom.  We report the results of a similar study for the population residing around nuclear sites in France.  The number of leukaemia deaths was 58, comparable to the 62 in control areas, and slightly less than the 67 expected from national mortality statistics.  Twelve deaths due to Hodgkin's disease were observed around nuclear sites; this is about twice the number of Hodgkin's deaths observed in control areas and twice the number expected from national mortality statistics.  This observation must, however, be interpreted in light of the fact that several causes of deaths were studied, increasing the play of chance.
A downstream initiation element required for efficient TATA box binding and in vitro function of TFIID.  The gfa gene encodes glial fibrillary acidic protein, an intermediate filament protein expressed in glial cells.  In vitro transcription analysis has shown that the human gfa promoter contains two initiation elements that can independently specify the transcription startpoint.  One of the elements is a TATA box 25 base pairs (bp) upstream from the transcription startpoint; the other is located between 10 and 50 bp downstream from the transcription initiation site.  We have now shown by transfection that both elements are required for efficient transcription in cultured cells.  A partially purified natural human TATA box-binding factor (TFIID) from HeLa cells gave footprints that extended from upstream of the TATA box through the downstream initiator.  Deletion of the downstream initiator inhibited both TFIID binding to the TATA box and transcription in vitro.  In contrast to natural human TFIID, clone human and yeast TFIIDs expressed in bacteria gave footprints covering only the TATA box region, although hypersensitive sites were observed in the downstream region.  The cloned TFIIDs also showed less dependence than natural human TFIID on the downstream initiator for both TATA box binding and in vitro transcription.  These results suggest that natural human TFIID contains an additional component(s) that contribute(s) to stable TFIID binding and effective transcription by interacting with the downstream initiator.
Inhibition of tumor growth in a glioma model treated with boron neutron capture therapy.  This investigation attempts to determine whether increased survival time seen when the F98 glioma model is treated with boron neutron capture therapy (BNCT) is a result of inhibition of tumor growth caused by radiation-induced alterations in endothelial cells and normal tissue components.  This indirect effect of radiation has been called the tumor bed effect.  A series of tumor-bearing rats was studied, using a standardized investigational BNCT protocol consisting of 50 mg/kg of Na2B12H11SH injected intravenously 14 to 17 hours before neutron irradiation at 4 x 10(12) n/cm2.  Ten rats, serving as controls, received no treatment either before or after tumor implantation.  A second group of 10 rats was treated with BNCT 4 days before tumor implantation; these animals received no further treatment.  The remaining group of 10 rats received no pretreatment but was treated with BNCT 10 days after implantation.  Histological and ultrastructural analyses were performed in 2 animals from each group 17 days after implantation.  Survival times of the untreated control animals (mean, 25.8 days) did not differ statistically from the survival times of the rats in the pretreated group (mean, 25.5 days).  The rats treated with BNCT after implantation survived significantly longer (P less than 0.02; mean, 33.2 days) than the controls and the preirradiated animals.  Tumor size indices calculated from measurements taken at the time of death were similar in all groups.  These results indicate that, with this tumor model, BNCT does not cause a tumor bed effect in cerebral tissue.  The therapeutic gains observed with BNCT result from direct effects on tumor cells or on the peritumoral neovascularity.
Multiple intracranial tumors of different cell types.  Multiple intracranial tumors of different cell types are rare.  We report nine patients with multiple intracranial tumors, who did not have a history of trauma, irradiation, or phacomatosis.  The clinical, radiological, and histopathological findings as well as indications for operations in patients with asymptomatic second tumors are discussed.
Brain stem and spinal metastases of supratentorial glioblastoma multiforme: a clinical series.  Although the spread of supratentorial glioblastoma multiforme to the brain stem and spine has been extensively described in published autopsy series, information on the diagnosis, treatment, and subsequent clinical course of patients manifesting symptoms of glioblastomatous dissemination ante mortem remains scant.  We report a series of 11 patients having the signs and symptoms of neuraxis dissemination of supratentorial glioblastoma multiforme.  All patients had radiographic documentation of metastases by either contrast-enhanced myelograms or enhanced magnetic resonance imaging scans.  Ten presented with spinal involvement, whereas one presented with lower cranial neuropathies secondary to diffuse involvement of the basal cisterns.  The mean age of the patients was 38.5 years, and the mean time interval between diagnosis of intracranial disease and diagnosis of metastases was 14.1 months.  After diagnosis of tumor spread, subsequent mean survival time was 2.8 months.  All patients received additional radiotherapy to the areas of metastasis, but the clinical response to radiotherapy was quite poor.  This study confirms previous reports in the literature suggesting that metastases occur in younger patients and in patients with extended survival.  The findings suggest that the relatively infrequent clinical incidence of the symptomatic spread of glioblastoma multiforme, as compared with the frequent incidental discovery of such spread at autopsy, may be the result of the limited survival of the affected patients, and not due to the biology of the tumor.
Ultrastructural evidence for differentiation in a human glioblastoma cell line treated with inhibitors of eicosanoid metabolism.  Human glioblastoma cells incubated in the presence of inhibitors of eicosanoid biosynthesis show decreased cellular proliferation without cytotoxicity.  We studied the ultrastructural morphology of a human glioblastoma cell line cultured with nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA), a lipoxygenase inhibitor, or 5,8,11,14-eicosatetraynoic acid, a cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase inhibitor.  When glioblastoma cells were treated for 3 days with antiproliferative concentrations of either agent, they shared many morphological characteristics, including evidence for increased astrocytic differentiation with only limited signs of toxicity.  The inhibited glioma cells demonstrated an increase in the number and length of astrocytic processes containing greater numbers of glial filaments, and the NDGA-treated cells also demonstrated extensive lateral pseudopod formation along the processes.  The glioblastoma cell shape also became more elongated, losing the usual nuclear lobularity and nuclear inclusions, especially in NDGA-treated cells.  Many cytoplasmic organelles packed the cytosol of the inhibited glioma cells, including prominent Golgi apparatus, dilated smooth endoplasmic reticulum evolving into dilated vesicles, cytoplasmic vacuoles, and numerous concentric laminations.  There was limited evidence for toxicity, however, as the mitochondria were more pleomorphic with some mitochondrial distention and disruption of the cristae along with an increase in cytoplasmic vacuolization.  We conclude that the inhibitors of eicosanoid biosynthesis, NDGA and 5,8,11,14-eicosatetraynoic acid, not only suppress glioblastoma cell proliferation, but also induce increased astrocytic differentiation.
Procarbazine chemotherapy in the treatment of recurrent malignant astrocytomas after radiation and nitrosourea failure.  The Brain Tumor Study Group has shown procarbazine (PCB) to be as effective an adjuvant treatment as 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea (BCNU).  We treated 35 patients with recurrent malignant astrocytomas after radiation and nitrosourea failure with successive courses of PCB 150 mg/m2/d for 28 days every 8 weeks.  After 2 courses, 2 patients had complete responses, 7 had partial responses, 11 had stable disease, and 15 had progression.  Significantly more patients receiving PCB had complete or partial responses or stable disease than a similar group of patients in a previous trial who received intra-arterial (IA) cisplatin (DDP).  There is a significant advantage in time to disease progression for those receiving PCB compared with those receiving IA diaziquone (AZQ).  Our results suggest that PCB is a more effective 2nd agent than IA DDP or AZQ following radiation and nitrosourea failure.
Basement membrane of cervical adenocarcinoma: an immunoperoxidase study of laminin and type IV collagen.  The basement membrane components type IV collagen and laminin were examined immunohistochemically in 14 cases of adenocarcinoma of the cervix.  The patterns of staining in adenocarcinoma in situ, invasive adenocarcinoma, and early invasive adenocarcinoma were compared to see whether characteristic patterns could be delineated.  Adenocarcinoma in situ had a uniform intact basement membrane, whereas the basement membrane of invasive adenocarcinoma was fragmented and irregular.  Cases of early stromal invasion showed early gland buds and outpouchings with defective basement membrane staining.  The degree of histologic differentiation of the tumor was not clearly related to the amount of basement membrane component staining.  The concept of early stromal invasion in cervical adenocarcinoma, as supported by our immunohistochemical studies, is discussed as it relates to a possible pathogenic mechanism in early invasion and infiltration of adenocarcinoma of the cervix.
Treatment of fallopian tube carcinoma with cisplatin, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide.  Primary carcinoma of the fallopian tube is uncommon and is often treated using regimens active in ovarian carcinoma.  Evidence is scant that such therapies benefit patients with fallopian tube carcinoma.  Between December 1979 and July 1988, we treated 18 patients who had adenocarcinoma of the fallopian tube with the combination of cisplatin (50 mg/m2), doxorubicin (50 mg/m2), and cyclophosphamide (500 mg/m2) administered intravenously on 1 day every 28 days.  Histologic confirmation of fallopian tube carcinoma was obtained before entry in the study.  Three patients had stage I disease, five had stage II, nine had stage III, and one had stage IV.  Sixteen patients received the combination therapy as first-line treatment after cytoreductive surgery, and two patients received it for recurrent carcinoma.  Seven patients had clinically measurable disease at the start of therapy.  Two of these patients had a complete clinical response, two had stable disease, and three had progressive disease.  Eight of the 15 patients with stages II-IV disease underwent second-look laparotomy; four had a complete response to therapy and four had a partial response, making the overall response rate 53%.  The toxicity of the regimen was moderate.  The median survival was 81 months.  Patients with stages II-IV disease had a median survival of 43.9 months and a progression-free survival of 22.5 months.  This regimen appears to be active in fallopian tube carcinoma and can result in response rates comparable to those reported for epithelial ovarian cancer.
Debulking of pelvic and para-aortic lymph node metastases in ovarian cancer with the cavitron ultrasonic surgical aspirator.  Six patients with metastatic ovarian cancer with extensive involvement of the pelvic and/or para-aortic lymph nodes underwent surgical debulking with the Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator.  Intraoperative and postoperative morbidity was minimal.  It is suggested that this technique may be used for cytoreductive surgery in combination with standard surgical techniques.
The epidemiology of ophthalmic malignancies in New York State.  The epidemiologic characteristics of more than 1400 primary eye cancers (ICD-9, site 190) diagnosed among New York State (NYS) residents between 1975 and 1986 are described.  Among NYS male residents, the average annual age-adjusted incidence rate was 7.5 per 1,000,000, and among NYS female residents, the rate was 5.4 per 1,000,000 (male:female rate ratio, 1.39).  The majority of ophthalmic malignancies were included within three histologic groupings: melanomas (70.4%), retinoblastomas (9.8%), and squamous cell carcinomas (9.2%).  The average annual incidence of retinoblastoma among persons in NYS who were less than 5 years of age was 9.5 per 1,000,000 for boys and 8.7 per 1,000,000 for girls (male:female rate ratio, 1.09).  The average annual incidence (age-adjusted) of ocular melanomas was 4.9 per 1,000,000 among men and 3.7 per 1,000,000 among women in NYS (male:female rate ratio, 1.32).  Expanded knowledge of the epidemiology of ophthalmic cancers can help to develop a foundation on which to monitor disease patterns and can serve to stimulate further etiologic research involving these rare malignancies.
Screening for neuroblastoma at 3 weeks of age: methods and preliminary results from the Quebec Neuroblastoma Screening Project.  A large neuroblastoma screening study was recently started in the province of Quebec, Canada.  This project, a collaboration between the Quebec Network for Genetic Medicine and the University of Minnesota, is studying the impact of screening infants for the preclinical detection of neuroblastoma on the population-based mortality caused by this tumor.  All infants born in Quebec during a 5-year period will be screened twice, at 3 weeks and at 6 months.  Urinary homovanillic acid and vanillylmandelic acid determination from dried filter paper samples is used for screening.  Initial qualitative screening is done by means of thin-layer chromatography with confirmatory quantitative screening by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS).  During the initial 6 months of 3-week screening, 41,673 neonates (92% compliance rate) were screened and 10.6% of them were tested also by GC-MS.  Nine of these neonates had positive results on two GC-MS tests and were referred for evaluation to rule out the presence of neuroblastoma.  Four had the tumor, 1 had a calcified adrenal gland, and 4 had no tumor detected.  Three additional neonates had clinical diagnosis of neuroblastoma before they reached the screening age of 3 weeks.  A neuroblastoma that did not secrete homovanillic acid or vanillylmandelic acid was diagnosed clinically in 1 additional patient who tested negative by screening.
Expression of murine renin genes in subcutaneous connective tissue.  A renin promoter-large tumor antigen (T antigen) fusion gene was constructed to provide a reporter function for renin expression in transgenic mice.  These transgenic mice gave rise to tumors in subcutaneous soft tissue, which was attributed to transgene expression at this site.  An immunohistochemical analysis of transgenic fetuses from several independent lines revealed scattered T-antigen-containing mesenchymal cells and fibroblasts in the subcutaneous layer of the skin between the panniculus carnosus muscle of the skin and the skeletal muscle of the body wall.  This localization is consistent with the location of overt tumorigenesis in adult mice.  This pattern was specific for the renin-T antigen fusion gene as no immunohistochemical staining was observed in transgenic fetuses containing a heterologous promoter-T antigen fusion gene.  Northern blot analysis of tumor RNA indicated that most of the tumors expressed both T antigen and the endogenous renin gene Ren-1c.  In addition, when multiple renin genes were introduced by crossing transgenic mice with nontransgenic DBA/2J mice, which contain another allele of the Ren-1 locus as well as the duplicated locus Ren-2, the resultant tumors expressed the Ren-2 gene.  Northern blots were then used to analyze renin expression in the subcutaneous tissue of normal mice.  Fully processed renin mRNA was detected in eviscerated 15.5-day postcoitus fetal and newborn carcasses and in newborn skin.  Our data indicate that there is a renin-expressing cell population in fetal and newborn subcutaneous tissue.
E1a-dependent expression of adenovirus genes in OTF963 embryonal carcinoma cells: role of E1a-induced differentiation.  Some undifferentiated F9 embryonal carcinoma cells allow adenovirus genes to be expressed independently of the E1a oncogene normally required for their activation; this has been attributed to a cellular equivalent of E1a in F9 cells.  However, transcription of all early genes was low in undifferentiated OTF963 embryonic carcinoma cells during the first 48 hr after infection with adenovirus type 5 (Ad5).  Transcription then increased to about the level seen 16 hr after infection of cells induced to differentiate by retinoic acid (RA) (referred to as RA-dF9 cells), but this increase did not occur in cells infected by the E1a deletion mutant dl312.  Addition of E1a in trans, or of RA, had no immediate effect on viral transcription in OTF963 cells, but viral transcription increased about 48 hr after these additions.  Ad5 induced transcription of several differentiation-specific genes in OTF963 cells with about the same kinetics as their induction by RA.  These genes were superinduced in RA-dF9 cells by cAMP or infection by adenovirus.  We suggest the small amount of E1a produced early in infection of OTF963 cells activates cellular genes, some of which are differentiation specific and required for efficient transcription of viral genes, so that E1a both induces and is induced by differentiation.  The simple hypothesis of a cellular equivalent to E1a does not adequately explain the complex interactions between viral and cellular genes in OTF963 embryonic carcinoma cells.
The human immunodeficiency virus type 2 vpr gene is essential for productive infection of human macrophages.  The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) genetic determinant(s) responsible for tropism in human T cells or macrophages are not well defined.  We studied the role of the HIV type 2 (HIV-2) nef and vpr genes in viral tropism.  HIV-2 mutants, lacking either vpr or nef genes, or both vpr and nef, were obtained by site-specific mutagenesis of a biologically active HIV-2 proviral clone (HIV-2sbl/isy), which is infectious in both human T cells and macrophages.  Viral progeny carrying mutations of nef, vpr, or of both nef and vpr genes replicated more efficiently than the parental virus in primary human peripheral blood cells and in the human Hut 78 T-cell line.  In contrast, the HIV-2 nef- mutant infected human macrophages as efficiently as the parental virus, whereas viruses lacking the vpr gene either alone or in conjunction with the lack of the nef gene did not replicate in macrophages.  Thus, some lack of nef in HIV-2 enhances viral replication in T cells and does not interfere with viral replication in primary macrophages, whereas vpr is essential for replication of HIV-2 in human macrophages.  Because the parental HIV-2sbl/isy cloned virus also infects rhesus macaques, the use in animal studies of these HIV-2 mutants with differences in cell tropism and rates of replication will be highly useful in understanding the mechanism of viral infectivity and possibly pathogenicity in vivo.
Human colorectal cancers display abnormal Fourier-transform infrared spectra.  Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) was applied to the study of tissue sections of human colorectal cancer.  Pairs of tissue samples from colorectal cancer and histologically normal mucosa 5-10 cm away from the tumor were obtained from 11 patients who underwent partial colectomy.  All cancer specimens displayed abnormal spectra compared with the corresponding normal tissues.  These changes involved the phosphate and C-O stretching bands, the CH stretch region, and the pressure dependence of the CH2 bending and C = O stretching modes.  Our findings indicate that in colonic malignant tissue, there are changes in the degree of hydrogen-bonding of (i) oxygen atoms of the backbone of nucleic acids (increased); (ii) OH groups of serine, tyrosine, and threonine residues (any or all of them) of cell proteins (decreased); and (iii) the C = O groups of the acyl chains of membrane lipids (increased).  In addition, they indicate changes in the structure of proteins and membrane lipids (as judged by the changes in their ratio of methyl to methylene groups) and in the packing and the conformational structure of the methylene chains of membrane lipids.  The cell(s) of the malignant colon tissues responsible for these spectral abnormalities is unknown.  Cultured colon adenocarcinoma cell lines displayed similarly abnormal FT-IR spectra.  The diagnostic potential of the observed changes is discussed.
Transfer of secretory proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus: discrimination between homologous and heterologous transfer in intact heterokaryons.  To examine aspects of the transfer of secretory proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus in situ, heterokaryons were formed between Hep G2 human hepatoma cells and WI-38 human fibroblasts.  The cells were appropriately treated with cycloheximide before fusion, which emptied them of their respective secretory proteins, serum albumin for the Hep G2 cells and procollagen I for the WI-38 cells.  After fusion was complete, the cycloheximide was washed out, protein synthesis was resumed, and the rates of reappearance of serum albumin and procollagen I in the two separated Golgi apparatuses within each heterokaryon were followed by immunofluorescence microscopy.  Serum albumin was found to always reappear first in the Golgi apparatus contributed by the Hep G2 half of the heterokaryon, and procollagen I in the Golgi apparatus of the WI-38 half.  These results suggest that the endoplasmic reticulum-to-Golgi apparatus transfer in situ is not simply a stochastic process but is either spatially restricted or exhibits cell-type specificity or both.
Adult T-cell leukemia-derived factor/thioredoxin, produced by both human T-lymphotropic virus type I- and Epstein-Barr virus-transformed lymphocytes, acts as an autocrine growth factor and synergizes with interleukin 1 and interleukin 2.  Interleukin 1 (IL-1) has been obtained from the Epstein-Barr virus-infected B-lymphoblastoid cell line 3B6 and shown to be involved in autocrine growth of 3B6 B cells.  Independently, adult T-cell leukemia-derived factor (ADF) was purified from human T-lymphotropic virus I-infected leukemic T-cell line (ATL-2) and reported as an interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor-inducing factor.  We have previously reported the same molecular mass, pI, and NH2-terminal amino acid sequence for both 3B6-derived IL-1 and ADF.  cDNA cloning of ADF demonstrated high homology with the prokaryotic disulfide reducing enzyme thioredoxin.  We show here that ADF and 3B6-derived IL-1 are identical.  By RNA blot, 3B6 and ATL-2 cells were shown to contain high levels of 0.6-kilobase mRNA corresponding to ADF.  Such message was not detected in resting peripheral blood lymphocytes but could be weakly induced by lymphocyte activation.  Antibodies have been raised against synthetic peptides corresponding to the NH2 terminus and the COOH terminus of ADF.  Immunoblotting and sequential immunoprecipitation with these antibodies revealed the same 13-kDa protein in 3B6 and ATL-2 cells.  Recombinant ADF could sustain growth of 3B6 and ATL-2 cells at low cellular concentration without fetal calf serum; ADF, thus, appears involved in their autocrine growth.  Similarly, recombinant ADF could enhance growth of other B-cell lines, including the Epstein-Barr virus-negative Burkitt lymphoma line BL41 and the lymphoblastoid cell lines CRAG8, CRB95, and 1G8.  Finally, recombinant ADF exhibits marked synergism with other cytokines, such as IL-1 and IL-2, allowing virally infected lymphocytes to respond to suboptimal amounts of a variety of growth factors.
The recombinant immunotoxin anti-Tac(Fv)-Pseudomonas exotoxin 40 is cytotoxic toward peripheral blood malignant cells from patients with adult T-cell leukemia.  Anti-Tac(Fv)-PE40 is a recombinant single-chain immunotoxin containing the heavy and light variable regions of the anti-Tac monoclonal antibody fused to a mutant form of Pseudomonas exotoxin (PE).  Anti-Tac binds to the p55 subunit of the human interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor, and anti-Tac(Fv)-PE40 kills human or monkey cell lines that contain either the intact IL-2 receptor or its p55 subunit alone.  To assess the usefulness of anti-Tac(Fv)-PE40 in treatment of IL-2 receptor-positive leukemia, we tested peripheral blood mononuclear cells from six patients with adult T-cell leukemia.  In each of the six patients, anti-Tac(Fv)-PE40 was extremely cytotoxic to the malignant cells.  Metabolic activity and sensitivity of the fresh cells improved when a small amount of IL-2 (10 units per ml) was present during incubation.  The toxin concentration necessary to inhibit protein synthesis by 50% after 16-hr incubation of cells with immunotoxin varied from 1.6 to 16 ng/ml (2.5-25 x 10(-11) M).  In every case, binding was by means of the Tac antigen because anti-Tac(Fv)-PE40 cytotoxicity was prevented by adding excess anti-Tac antibody.  Moreover, anti-Tac alone or an inactive mutant of anti-Tac(Fv)-PE40 without ADP-ribosylation activity had very little cytotoxic activity.  Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from normal controls, from a patient with Tac-negative leukemia, and from adult T-cell leukemia patients without significant peripheral blood involvement were not sensitive to anti-Tac(Fv)-PE40.  These results indicate that anti-Tac(Fv)-PE40 is a potent cytotoxin against adult T-cell leukemia cells in vitro and warrants clinical testing.
A 170-kDa membrane-bound protease is associated with the expression of invasiveness by human malignant melanoma cells.  Malignant spreading of cancer cells requires cell surface proteases that cleave the crosslinked collagenous matrix of connective tissues.  From correlating the morphologically defined invasiveness of tumor cells with the presence of specific membrane-associated proteases, we have identified a malignant human melanoma cell line, LOX, that invades crosslinked gelatin films in vitro and contains uniquely a neutral 170-kDa gelatinase in the cell membrane.  A similar gelatinase was found in membranes recovered from culture media conditioned with LOX.  The 170-kDa gelatinase is a wheat germ agglutinin-binding protein.  The proteolytic activity is maximal at neutral pH, enhanced by EDTA and dithiothreitol, inhibited by the cysteine protease inhibitors N-ethylmaleimide, HgCl2, and phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and can bind to an organomercurial adsorbent, suggesting that it is a neutral sulfhydryl-sensitive protease.  This 170-kDa gelatinase of LOX cells was not found in a control melanoma cell line, SK-MEL28, or in 32 other tumor cell lines that did not show extracellular gelatin degradation.  Thus, we have identified a large membrane-bound protease that may be a specific marker molecule for melanoma cell invasiveness.
Introduction of nerve growth factor (NGF) receptors into a medulloblastoma cell line results in expression of high- and low-affinity NGF receptors but not NGF-mediated differentiation.  Expression of the cloned human nerve growth factor receptor (NGFR) cDNA in cell lines can generate both high- and low-affinity binding sites.  Since the inability to respond appropriately to differentiation factors such as NGF may contribute to determining the malignant phenotype of neuroblastomas, we sought to determine whether the same is true of medulloblastomas.  To generate a human central nervous system neuronal cell line that would respond to NGF, we infected the medulloblastoma cell line D283 MED with a defective retrovirus carrying the cDNA coding for the human NGFR.  The resultant cells (MED-NGFR) expressed abundant low- and high-affinity NGFRs, and NGF treatment induced a rapid transient increase of c-fos mRNA in the NGFR-expressing cells but not in the parent line or in cells infected with virus lacking the cDNA insert.  However, the MED-NGFR cells did not internalize the NGFR at high efficiency, nor did they differentiate in response to NGF.  Three important conclusions emerge from this study: (i) internalization of NGFRs is not necessary for some early rapid transcriptional effects of NGF; (ii) an unknown factor(s) that cooperates with the cloned NGFR in allowing high-affinity NGF binding is found in a primitive central nervous system cell line; and (iii) NGFRs introduced into and expressed by D283 MED (i.e., MED-NGFR) cells are partially functional but are unable to induce differentiation in these primitive neuron-like tumor cells, implying that high-efficiency receptor-mediated endocytosis of NGF and its receptor may be a necessary step in the cascade of events leading to NGF-mediated differentiation.
Dioxin-inducible, Ah receptor-dependent transcription in vitro.  We have developed a homologous in vitro transcription system that requires (i) 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (called TCDD or dioxin), (ii) the Ah receptor, and (iii) a dioxin-responsive enhancer for activity.  Unfractionated nuclear extracts from mouse hepatoma cells contain an inhibitor and fail to direct transcription in vitro.  However, following phosphocellulose chromatography and reconstitution, the fractionated nuclear extract directs accurate transcription in vitro, using as a template the promoter/enhancer region from the mouse cytochrome P1-450 gene (Cyp1a1) linked to a "G-free cassette" (which generates a transcript with no guanosine residues).  Extracts from TCDD-treated cells exhibit higher activity than extracts from untreated cells when transcribing a template containing both the promoter and enhancer but not when transcribing a template containing the promoter alone.  Extracts from Ah receptor-defective cells fail to direct in vitro transcription in a TCDD-inducible fashion.  A regulatory element that contains two binding sites for the liganded Ah receptor plus a truncated Cyp1a1 promoter suffices to direct TCDD-inducible, Ah receptor-dependent transcription in vitro.  The inducible, receptor-dependent, enhancer-dependent properties of this system make it appropriate for analyzing in vitro the mechanism of dioxin action and the function of the Ah receptor.
Molecular structure of a major insulin/mitogen-activated 70-kDa S6 protein kinase.  The molecular structure of a rat hepatoma 70-kDa insulin/mitogen-stimulated S6 protein kinase, obtained by molecular cloning, is compared to that of a rat homolog of the 85-kDa Xenopus S6 protein kinase alpha; both kinases were cloned from H4 hepatoma cDNA libraries.  The 70-kDa S6 kinase (calculated molecular mass of 59,186 Da) exhibits a single catalytic domain that is most closely related in amino acid sequence (56% identity) to the amino-terminal, kinase C-like domain of the rat p85 S6 kinase (calculated molecular mass of 82,695 Da); strong similarity extends through a further 67 residues carboxyl-terminal to the catalytic domain (40% identity), corresponding to a region also conserved among the kinase C family.  Outside of this segment of approximately 330 amino acids, the structures of the p70 and p85 S6 kinases diverge substantially.  The p70 S6 kinase is known to be activated through serine/threonine phosphorylation by unidentified insulin/mitogen-activated protein kinases.  A model for the regulation of p70 S6 protein kinase activity is proposed wherein the low activity of the unphosphorylated enzyme results from the binding of a basic, inhibitory pseudosubstrate site (located carboxyl-terminal to the extended catalytic domain) to an acidic substrate binding region (located amino-terminal to the catalytic domain); substrate binding is thereby prevented.  S6 kinase activation requires displacement of this inhibitory segment, which is proposed to occur consequent to its multiple phosphorylation.  The putative autoinhibitory segment contains several serine and threonine residues, each followed directly by a proline residue.  This motif may prevent autophosphorylation but permit transphosphorylation; two of these serine residues reside in a maturation promoting factor (MPF)/cdc-2 consensus motif.  Thus, hormonal regulation of S6 kinase may involve the action of MPF/cdc-2 or protein kinases with related substrate specificity.
Identical splicing of aberrant epidermal growth factor receptor transcripts from amplified rearranged genes in human glioblastomas.  The epidermal growth factor receptor gene has been found to be amplified and rearranged in human glioblastomas in vivo.  Here we present the sequence across a splice junction of aberrant epidermal growth factor receptor transcripts derived from corresponding and uniquely rearranged genes that are coamplified and coexpressed with non-rearranged epidermal growth factor receptor genes in six primary human glioblastomas.  Each of these six tumors contains aberrant transcripts derived from identical splicing of exon 1 to exon 8 as a consequence of a deletion-rearrangement of the amplified gene, the extent of which is variable among these tumors.  In spite of this intertumoral variability, each intragenic rearrangement results in loss of the same 801 coding bases (exons 2-7) and creation of a new codon at the novel splice site in their corresponding transcripts.  These rearrangements do not, however, affect the mRNA sequence for the signal peptide, the first five codons, or the reading frame downstream of the rearrangement.
A prospective clinical evaluation of autogenous vein grafts used as a nerve conduit for distal sensory nerve defects of 3 cm or less.  The purpose of this study was to determine the efficacy of autogenous vein grafts as nerve grafts (AVNC) for bridging of small peripheral sensory nerve gaps as compared with direct repair and with conventional nerve grafting techniques (ANG).  Patients with painful neuroma or segmental nerve injury of 3 cm were chosen as the test group.  Those amenable to direct repair were classified as controls.  Between 1982 to 1988, a total of 22 patients were enrolled in this study.  A total of 34 nerves were repaired, 15 with a venous nerve conduit, 4 with a sural nerve graft, and 15 with direct repair.  Significant symptom relief and satisfactory sensory function return were uniformly observed.  The two-point discrimination measurements indicated superiority of direct repair and probably of conventional nerve grafting.  However, the universally favorable patient acceptance and the return of measurable two-point discrimination indicates the effectiveness of autogenous vein grafts as nerve conduits when selectively applied to bridge a small nerve gap (less than or equal to 3 cm) on nonessential peripheral sensory nerves.
Dacron fabric-enveloped hydroxyapatite prosthesis for sternal tumor defect: an autopsy report.  A 38-year-old housewife with solitary plasmacytoma of the manubrium who underwent a subtotal sternectomy treated by resection of the lesion is reported.  This was followed by replacement with a Dacron fabric-enveloped hydroxyapatite prosthesis.  The Dacron fabric was sutured to the surrounding tissues, and then the clavicle was passed through the cylindrical-shaped Dacron fabric to form a sternoclavicular joint capsule.  The patient returned to her daily life 3 months after the operation.  She had no trouble in her daily living, without any dislocation of the sternoclavicular joints or any displacement of the artificial sternum.  The autopsy examination about 1 year after the operation showed that the Dacron fabric enveloping the artificial sternum became stronger with time.  The sternoclavicular joint also was stably fixed, and the Dacron fabric fulfilled its function as an artificial articular capsule and biologic fixation of the surrounding supporting tissues.
Interventional radiology of the biliary tract. Intraductal radiation.  One palliative method of treating patients with a high duct cholangiocarcinoma is the use of 192Ir wire.  This is placed through the tumor, which has been previously intubated, and delivers a high local dose of radiation.  The mean survival time in 30 patients treated with intraductal radiation was 16.8 months, an improvement compared to surgical bypass or endoscopic and radiologic drainage procedures.
Regulation of gene expression with double-stranded phosphorothioate oligonucleotides.  Alteration of gene transcription by inhibition of specific transcriptional regulatory proteins is necessary for determining how these factors participate in cellular differentiation.  The functions of these proteins can be antagonized by several methods, each with specific limitations.  Inhibition of sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins was achieved with double-stranded (ds) phosphorothioate oligonucleotides that contained octamer or kappa B consensus sequences.  The phosphorothioate oligonucleotides specifically bound either octamer transcription factor or nuclear factor (NF)-kappa B.  The modified oligonucleotides accumulated in cells more effectively than standard ds oligonucleotides and modulated gene expression in a specific manner.  Octamer-dependent activation of a reporter plasmid or NF-kappa B-dependent activation of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) enhancer was inhibited when the appropriate phosphorothioate oligonucleotide was added to a transiently transfected B cell line.  Addition of phosphorothioate oligonucleotides that contained the octamer consensus to Jurkat T leukemia cells inhibited interleukin-2 (IL-2) secretion to a degree similar to that observed with a mutated octamer site in the IL-2 enhancer.  The ds phosphorothioate oligonucleotides probably compete for binding of specific transcription factors and may provide anti-viral, immunosuppressive, or other therapeutic effects.
Survey of Alabama physicians' use of mammography, 1989.  In early 1989 we surveyed by questionnaire Alabama primary care physicians (N = 1800) concerning their attitudes toward and use of mammography.  There were 681 respondents (37.8%).  The majority (83%) recommend mammograms for their patients according to the American Cancer Society guidelines and obtain baseline studies in asymptomatic women between the ages of 35 and 40 years.  It appears that the cost of mammograms is decreasing in Alabama; a screening study was available for $50 or less to 34% of responding physicians.  Almost one half (48%) of the physician respondents believe that more than 50% of their patients have had at least one mammogram.
Trabecular or Merkel's cell carcinoma.  Two cases of trabecular cell carcinoma of the skin are presented.  The clinical presentation and behavior, and the histologic findings, of the tumor are described.  Surgical excision of the primary lesion with regional lymph node dissection, if indicated, is the treatment of choice.  Distant metastasis is treated by local irradiation.
Time to recurrence varies inversely with thickness in clinical stage 1 cutaneous melanoma.  The thickness of a tumor has been identified as the principal prognostic factor in cutaneous malignant melanoma.  However, time to recurrence has not conclusively been related to thickness.  A retrospective study of 216 patients with a primary cutaneous malignant melanoma that recurred was conducted to clarify this relationship and investigate possible independent relationships between age at diagnosis and sex of patients to time to recurrence.  The results of analysis of linear regression revealed an inverse linear relationship between thickness and time to recurrence (p less than 0.001).  Patients more than 50 years of age at the time of diagnosis were shown to relapse sooner than those less than 50 years of age (p = 0.014).  Sex was not a significant factor in predicting time to recurrence (p greater than 0.10).  These results suggest that thickness of tumor provides an indication of time to recurrence in those patients destined to recur and stress the need for long term surveillance in patients with a history of malignant melanoma because of the possibility of late relapse even with thin lesions.
The justification for surgical treatment of metastatic melanoma of the gastrointestinal tract.  Fifty-six patients with symptomatic metastatic melanoma of the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) treated surgically at the Sydney Melanoma Unit between 1974 and 1989 were reviewed.  The majority of these patients presented with abdominal pain or symptoms of anemia.  The small intestine was the site of metastasis in more than 80 per cent.  The mean over-all survival time was 11.7 months (range of one to 60 months) after surgical treatment of a first metastasis to the GIT and 3.6 months (range of zero to 12 months) postoperatively for a second GIT metastasis.  Forty-four of the patients reported complete relief of their symptoms postoperatively.  The results suggest that an aggressive approach to symptomatic GIT metastases from malignant melanoma is justified both to relieve distressing symptoms and to prolong life.
Decollateralization with silicone rubber sheeting for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: a preliminary report.  A new treatment method, interception of collaterals with a silicone rubber sheet, was applied to three patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma in whom arterial chemoembolization was assessed as ineffective because of the developed collateral feeding arteries.  This procedure was followed by arterial chemoembolization or intraportal infusion chemotherapy or both.  Follow-up celiac angiography confirmed that the long-term decollateralization was achieved by shielding the liver with silicone rubber sheeting.  This technique resulted in partial responses without serious complications in all the patients including two who had no responses to chemoembolization before the procedure.  The response durations were 5, 21, and 27, months, respectively.  One patient died of gastrointestinal bleeding 7 months after the decollateralization.  The other two patients are still alive, and the survivals after the procedure are 28 and 30 months, respectively.  This therapy is considered promising and may be worth choosing as an adjuvant treatment for advanced hepatic malignancies uncontrolled by arterial chemotherapy or chemoembolization.
Constitutional symptoms in patients with germ cell neoplasms.  A patient with a mediastinal germ cell neoplasm evidenced fever, weight loss, pruritus, and painful adenopathy on ingestion of alcohol.  Retrospective review revealed that 9 percent of 104 patients with advanced germ cell neoplasm evidence constitutional symptoms at presentation.
Natural history of cardiac rhabdomyoma in infancy and childhood.  Although spontaneous regression of cardiac rhabdomyoma has been reported, prognosis is still considered to be poor and surgery continues to be indicated.  The experience with rhabdomyoma diagnosed in live infants over a 20-year period was reviewed.  Diagnosis by angiography or echocardiography was accepted only if multiple tumors were present or if tuberous sclerosis was also diagnosed.  Nine patients (3 diagnosed prenatally and the remaining 6 at age less than 8 months) were identified as having a total of 24 tumors.  Measurements in 2 planes demonstrated at least some evidence of regression in 24 patients (100%), with 20 of 24 having complete resolution.  One patient required delayed surgery for excision of a subaortic ridge that appeared at the site of a resolved tumor.  Our findings suggest that pediatric cardiac rhabdomyoma is most often a benign condition in which spontaneous regression is the rule.  Surgery is recommended only for patients with refractory dysrhythmias or severe hemodynamic compromise.
Diet and female sex hormone concentrations: an intervention study for the type of fat consumed.  A possible mechanism by which dietary fat may influence the development of breast cancer is by influencing the concentration of female sex hormones.  This study investigated the effect of alteration in the type of fat consumed on concentrations of female sex hormones in serum.  Female volunteers were randomly assigned to continue on their usual meat-eating diet, change to a vegetarian diet, or change to a diet that was predominantly vegetarian but where fish was consumed at least three times per week.  Change to the vegetarian or fish diet had little effect on diet total hormone concentrations; however, the amount of estradiol was significantly decreased in the vegetarian group.  When nutrient consumption was correlated with hormone concentrations, prolactin was directly associate with fat consumption, sex-hormone-binding globulin was inversely associated with fat consumption (particularly cholesterol consumption), and the proportion of nonprotein-bound estradiol was directly associated with complex carbohydrate consumption.
Dietary fat and risk of breast cancer.  The relationship between dietary fat and subsequent risk of breast cancer was studied in 3988 initially cancer-free Finnish women aged 20-69 y.  During a follow-up period of 20 y, 54 breast-cancer cases were diagnosed.  Risk of breast cancer was significantly inversely related to energy intake and nonsignificantly inversely related to absolute fat intake.  A positive association between energy-adjusted total fat intake and occurrence of breast cancer was also observed.  The relative risk in the highest tertile as compared with the lowest tertile was 1.7 (95% confidence limits 0.6-4.8).  The corresponding relative risks were 1.4 (0.5-3.7) for saturated fatty acids, 2.7 (1.0-7.4) for monounsaturated fatty acids, 1.2 (0.6-2.8) for polyunsaturated fatty acids, and 2.2 (1.0-5.0) for cholesterol intake.  Adjustment for different potential confounding factors did not alter the results.  The present data suggest that breast cancer is associated inversely with energy intake and weakly positively with energy-adjusted fat intake.
Breast cancer and dietary and plasma concentrations of carotenoids and vitamin A.  A case-control study of breast cancer was conducted in Buffalo.  Participants completed a food frequency questionnaire and donated a fasting blood sample before definitive workup for breast masses.  Dietary and plasma concentrations of carotenoids and retinol for 83 women found to have breast cancer were compared with those of 113 women found to be free of breast cancer (control subjects).  There were no case-control differences in dietary estimates of vitamin A intake or in plasma alpha-carotene and lycopene.  However, subjects with breast cancer had lower concentrations of plasma beta-carotene than did control subjects (P = 0.02).  There was no overall association between plasma retinol and breast cancer but a positive relationship was observed between retinol and breast cancer in the subgroup with low beta-carotene values.  These results suggest that low plasma beta-carotene is associated with increased risk of breast cancer.  Other studies will need to determine whether low carotene concentrations are a subtle effect of the disease or might be causally related to breast cancer.
Demonstration of Lipiodol in paraffin sections using a modified silver impregnation technique.  To demonstrate postangiographic Lipiodol (LIP) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in paraffin sections, direct impregnation of formalin-fixed tissue blocks with silver nitrate (AgNO3) was followed by routine processing.  LIP appeared as black globules in the sinusoids.  Ninety-four tissue blocks from 13 postangiographic LIP HCCs and 69 from 8 non-LIP HCCs and 4 fatty livers were studied.  Seventy-two of 73 negative controls and all positive blocks as seen on soft tissue radiographs (STRs) were correctly coded (specificity 98.6%, sensitivity 100%).  Twenty-six of the 44 LIP-negative areas on STRs from LIP cases contained scanty globules of less than 10 microns in diameter.  Fatty change gave no positive readings.  Thus, modified AgNO3 impregnation is a simple, accurate means of detecting LIP in high-quality paraffin sections suitable for tumor diagnosis and, if applied to postangiographic LIP, ultrasonographically guided liver biopsy, can verify that a biopsy has reached a suspected tumor focus.
Immunophenotypic aberrancy in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia.  Some recent reports indicate a high frequency of immunophenotypic aberrancy in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).  To investigate this issue with regard to adult ALL, the authors reviewed the immunophenotyping data from 39 cases analyzed in their clinical laboratory.  Flow cytometric analysis of peripheral blood and/or bone marrow was performed with the use of a panel of 21 B-cell, T-cell, and myeloid monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs).  The surface antigen profiles of the leukemic cells were compared with those of normal bone marrow and thymic counterparts, as defined by current models.  Twenty-six cases were B-precursor ALL, 8 were T-ALL, and 3 were B-ALL (Burkitt's leukemia).  Only two cases coexpressed lymphoid and myeloid antigens.  In contrast, intralineage aberrancy was quite common.  Immunophenotypes from 13 of 26 B-precursor ALL cases deviated from normal B-lineage marrow cells as defined by a recent classification.  The T-ALL cases were also immunophenotypically heterogeneous.  This high incidence of aberrant antigen expression in adult ALL suggests that leukemogenesis also involves aberrant differentiation rather than purely a process of maturational arrest.
Malignant rhabdoid tumor of the liver. A distinct clinicopathologic entity.  A malignant rhabdoid tumor occurring as a primary hepatic neoplasm in a six-month-old white infant is reported.  It was treated by an attempt at total resection involving right hepatic lobectomy and by chemotherapy with cis-platinum, VP-16, and Adriamycin.  Despite this, recurrence of the tumor resulted in the girl's death within three months.  The neoplasm showed typical light microscopic features of malignant rhabdoid tumor as well as filamentous cytoplasmic inclusions by electron microscopic examination and staining for both cytokeratin and vimentin by immunohistochemistry.  The classic clinicopathologic features of this tumor support the concept that malignant rhabdoid tumors similar to those of the kidney may occur in extrarenal sites.
Primary malignant melanoma of the lower respiratory tract. Report of a case and literature review.  The authors report a case of primary bronchial malignant melanoma, occurring in a 34-year-old woman presenting with persistent cough.  At bronchoscopic examination, a polypoid mass was found to occlude the left mainstem bronchus.  Biopsies showed a malignant epithelioid tumor resembling an atypical carcinoid.  Histochemistry, electron microscopic study, and immunohistochemistry confirmed the diagnosis of melanoma.  Physical examination and additional clinical history to exclude other possible primary sites were negative.  The patient underwent thoracotomy with left pneumonectomy.  Nineteen months after resection she was found to have a histologically similar tumor involving her left adrenal gland.  Review of the literature shows that melanoma of the lower respiratory tract has been reported only in adults and has a tendency to present as a central polypoid growth that may be responsive to surgical resection.
Granular cell tumor of the esophagus: endoscopic ultrasonographic demonstration and endoscopic removal.  A 35-yr-old Japanese man with a granular cell tumor of the esophagus that was removed by endoscopic polypectomy is presented.  Radiography and endoscopy showed a 20 x 12 mm sessile protrusion in the distal esophagus.  Endoscopic ultrasonography demonstrated the hypoechoic mass in the submucosa without continuity to the muscularis propria.  The lesion was successfully treated by endoscopic polypectomy without complications.  The cross-sections of the resected specimen were quite in agreement with the ultrasonographic findings.  Endoscopic ultrasonography is valuable to assess the exact location and extent of the tumor, and to determine the indication for endoscopic polypectomy.
A chance to cut is a chance to cure?  Fifty-seven patients underwent local excision of an invasive distal rectal cancer as an initial operative procedure with curative intent.  Five-year survival was 82.5%, and the rectal cancer specific mortality rate was only 10.5%.  The level of wall invasion, vascular permeation, tumor ulceration, mobility, and differentiation were the criteria studied for prognosis.  Poor prognostic factors included mucinous cell differentiation and full thickness invasion, and in these cases, abdominoperineal resection was recommended.  None of the 27 patients without these adverse prognostic factors died from rectal cancer.  The other factors did not appear to influence the outcome, and local excision of distal rectal cancer would be the treatment of choice in such selected patients.
Increase of beta 1-6-branched oligosaccharides in human esophageal carcinomas invasive against surrounding tissue in vivo and in vitro.  The -GlcNAc beta 1-6Man- (beta 1-6) branched N-glycosidic oligosaccharides expressed on tumor cells have been found to contribute to malignant and metastatic potential in experimental tumor models.  Phaseolus vulgaris leukoagglutinin (L-PHA) requires the beta 1-6-linked lactosamine antenna for high-affinity binding and was used histochemically to characterize the distribution of these sugar structures in human esophageal squamous cell carcinomas from 42 patients.  Leukoagglutinin-reactive carcinoma cells in the invasive tumors were distributed predominantly on the outer surface of the tumor adjacent to the surrounding tissue.  Furthermore, when TE 1 cells, a human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma line, were cultured in a collagen gel matrix to obtain colonies in a three-dimensional form, these colonies exhibited high affinity for L-PHA binding only in the outer cell layer facing the collagen matrix, unrelated to the cell growth cycle.  These findings suggest that the increase in beta 1-6-branched oligosaccharides in esophageal carcinomas is an important trait of the tumor in the invasion into the surrounding tissue.
Coexpression patterns of vimentin and glial filament protein with cytokeratins in the normal, hyperplastic, and neoplastic breast.  The authors studied by immunohistochemistry the intermediate filament (IF) protein profile of 66 frozen samples of breast tissue, including normal parenchyma, all variants of fibrocystic disease (FCD), fibroadenomas, cystosarcoma phylloides, and ductal and lobular carcinomas.  Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) to cytokeratins included MAb KA 1, which binds to polypeptide 5 in a complex with polypeptide 14 and recognizes preferentially myoepithelial cells; MAb KA4, which binds to polypeptides 14, 15, 16 and 19; individual MAbs to polypeptides 7, 13, and 16, 17, 18, and 19, and the MAb mixture AE1/AE3.  The authors also applied three MAbs to vimentin (Vim), and three MAbs to glial filament protein (GFP).  Selected samples were studied by double-label immunofluorescence microscopy and by staining sequential sections with some of the said MAbs, an MAb to alpha-smooth muscle actin, and well-characterized polyclonal antibodies for the possible coexpression of diverse types of cytoskeletal proteins.  Gel electrophoresis and immunoblot analysis also were performed.  All samples reacted for cytokeratins with MAbs AE1/AE3, although the reaction did not involve all cells.  Monoclonal antibody KA4 stained preferentially the luminal-secretory cells in the normal breast and in FCD, whereas it stained the vast majority of cells in all carcinomas.  Monoclonal antibody KA1 stained preferentially the basal-myoepithelial cells of the normal breast and FCD while staining tumor cell subpopulations in 4 of 31 carcinomas.  Vimentin-positive cells were found in 8 of 12 normal breasts and in 12 of 20 FCD; in most cases, Vim-reactive cells appeared to be myoepithelial, but occasional luminal cells were also stained.  Variable subpopulations of Vim-positive cells were noted in 9 of 20 ductal and in 1 of 7 lobular carcinomas.  Glial filament protein-reactive cells were found in normal breast lobules and ducts and in 15 of 20 cases of FCD; with rare exceptions, GFP-reactivity was restricted to basally located, myoepithelial-appearing cells.  Occasional GFP-reactive cells were found in 3 of 31 carcinomas.  Evaluation of sequential sections and double-label immunofluorescence microscopy showed the coexpression of certain cytokeratins (possibly including polypeptides 14 and 17) with vimentin and alpha-smooth muscle actin together with GFP in some myoepithelial cells.  The presence of GFP in myoepithelial cells was confirmed by gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting.  Our results indicate that coexpression of cytokeratin with vimentin and/or GFP is comparatively frequent in normal basal-myoepithelial cells of the breast.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
Expression of aminopeptidase N (CD13) in mesenchymal tumors.  For a long time, CD13 molecules have been considered to be restricted to myeloid cells and related neoplasms.  Meanwhile, however, expression of CD13 has also been detected in some hepatocellular, gallbladder, renal, and lung carcinomas, and even in some fibrosarcomas and malignant melanomas.  In this study, expression of CD13 antigen was immunohistochemically examined in non-neoplastic mesenchymal cells, along with 33 benign and 83 malignant mesenchymal tumors (MET) using CD13 monoclonal antibodies (MAb) My7, U71, WM-15, and MoU48.  In non-neoplastic mesenchymal cells, expression of CD13 was restricted to perivascular fibrocytes/blasts, tissue histiocytes, osteoclasts, and to the perineurium of peripheral nerve trunks.  Under neoplastic conditions, CD13 was detectable in some tumors of smooth muscle, fibrous, fibrohistiocytic, synovial, osteogenic, and peripheral nerve sheath origin, and even in some tumors of adipose tissue.  Tumors of striated muscle origin, of autonomic ganglia, and of cartilage-forming tissues were CD13-negative throughout.  Thus in most but not all tumors studied the pattern of expression of CD13 mirrors the situation found in their cells of origin.  These findings enrich the data on expression of leukocyte differentiation antigens in extra-hematopoietic tissues.  Expression of CD13, which meanwhile is known to be identical to aminopeptidase N, an important peptide-cleaving enzyme, in only some MET might reflect a special functional state of these neoplasms.
Immunocytochemical localization of progesterone receptors in endocrine cells of the human pancreas.  Progesterone receptors (PgR) have been immunocytochemically localized in the nuclei of several (40% to 75%) endocrine cells of the human pancreas and in a more variable number of neoplastic cells of 7 of 18 endocrine pancreatic tumors.  Conversely the exocrine epithelial cells of the pancreas did not exhibit any PgR immunoreactivity in normal as well as in different pathologic conditions, including pancreatic adenocarcinomas.  Estrogen receptors were not detected in any of the pancreatic samples investigated.  Double immunocytochemical experiments have documented that PgR immunoreactivity in normal Langerhans islets is a consistent feature of most (75%) glucagon-producing A cells, of approximately 5% to 20% of insulin-producing B cells, and of a variable percentage of pancreatic polypeptide (PP)-producing cells, ranging from 5% to 70%.  These figures were not affected by the sex, age, or underlying disease of the patients.  The reported findings corroborate previous clinical and experimental evidence indicating that sex steroid hormones may have some regulatory effects on the functional activity of the endocrine pancreas.
Immediate versus delayed shoulder exercises after axillary lymph node dissection.  A total of 144 evaluable patients with breast cancer were enrolled in a multicenter, randomized, prospective study to establish the role of delayed shoulder exercises on wound drainage and shoulder function after axillary lymph node dissection.  Patients in group 1 (n = 78) started active shoulder exercises 1 day postoperatively.  Patients in group 2 (n = 66) started on the eight postoperative day, following 1 week of immobilization of the arm.  Patients in group 2 had 14% less wound drainage volume than those in group 1 (600 +/- 436 mL versus 701 +/- 398 mL); this difference, however, was not significant.  Also, no differences could be established between the two groups when duration and volume of wound drainage, number and volume of seroma aspirations, wound complication rates, and shoulder function were compared 6 months after surgery.
Variations in sensitivity after sectioning the intercostobrachial nerve.  The authors present a prospective study of the variations in sensitivity that appear in the armpit and arm after the intercostobrachial nerve has been sectioned in a modified radical mastectomy.  Of a total of 208 patients studied between 1978 and 1987, the intercostobrachial nerve was sectioned in 139 patients, whereas in 30 it remained intact; in 39 patients only peripheral branches of the nerve were sectioned.  The patients were examined at regular postoperative intervals in order to evaluate their sensitivity both to touch and to pain in the axilla and arm.  Four hundred thirty-three examinations were carried out and the 3 operative groups were assessed accordingly.  After the nerve was sectioned, there was increasing anesthesia in the armpit and hypoesthesia on the posterointernal face of the arm, while for the patients in whom the intercostobrachial nerve remained intact, these alterations were less intense and long-lasting.  Significant statistical differences between the two groups also exist.  In the absence of axillary lymphatic ganglia infiltrated by the tumor, the conservation of the intercostobrachial nerve is recommended.
Anesthesia for craniotomy: a double-blind comparison of alfentanil, fentanyl, and sufentanil.  Using a prospective, randomized, and double-blind study design, alfentanil (n = 15), fentanyl (n = 14), or sufentanil (n = 16), in combination with N2O, were administered to patients undergoing craniotomy for supratentorial tumor resection.  Physicians were given two syringes, one of which was labeled as "load" for the initial loading dose and the other as "maintenance" for continuous infusion.  The concentration of drug in each syringe was adjusted to permit administration on a milliliter per kilogram basis.  The target loading doses for alfentanil, fentanyl, and sufentanil were 75, 10, and 1 microgram/kg, respectively, and initial infusion rates were 33.5, 2.0, and 0.3 microgram.kg-1.h-1, respectively.  Additional supplementary boluses and changes in maintenance infusion rate were made according to predetermined guidelines.  Isoflurane, in increasing 0.2% inspired increments, was used only when the maximum allowed opioid dose had been given (i.e., supplementary bolus doses equal to 75% of the calculated loading dose or supplementary bolus doses equal to 50% of the calculated loading dose combined with a 50% increase in the maintenance infusion rate).  Opioid infusions were stopped at the time of bone flap replacement.  Antihypertensive medications and naloxone were subsequently given at the discretion of the anesthesiologist.  Group demographics were not different.  Total volumes of drug were similar among groups indicating equipotent preparations.  Administration of isoflurane, antihypertensive medications, and naloxone were not different among groups.  Although decreases in blood pressure seen with induction were similar among groups, alfentanil-treated patients received ephedrine more frequently before intubation.  Thirty minutes after entry into the postanesthesia recovery area, respiratory rate and pH were lowest in sufentanil-treated patients.
The single-breath nitrogen test, mortality, and cancer.  The relationship between indices of the single-breath nitrogen test and mortality, overall cancer incidence, and respiratory cancer incidence was examined in a cohort of 876 men, 46 to 69 yr of age, examined in 1974 and followed until June 1985.  Closing volume, closing capacity, and slope of phase III were not related to mortality or cancer.  In contrast, FEV1 was related to mortality, with an estimated relative mortality risk of 1.37 (95% confidence interval, 1.11 to 1.70) per liter under the expected FEV1, given height, age, and smoking, but FEV1 was not related to cancer.  Inability to perform acceptable single-breath nitrogen test tracings was related to mortality with a relative mortality risk of 2.03 (1.45 to 2.85), but not to cancer.  We conclude that indices of the single-breath nitrogen test have no predictive value concerning overall mortality and cancer incidence.
Colorectal cancer: evidence for distinct genetic categories based on proximal or distal tumor location   PURPOSE: To examine studies of normal colon and colorectal cancer for evidence that the location of the primary tumor proximal or distal to the splenic flexure of the colon may determine distinct genetic categories of this disease.  DATA IDENTIFICATION: Studies were identified through a manual search of journals, through MEDLINE, and through review of bibliographies in identified articles.  STUDY SELECTION: Approximately 300 articles were examined.  About 150 articles were excluded because tumor location was not reported or was reported in a way that did not permit correlation with results or conclusions.  DATA EXTRACTION: Articles were selected either because the presentation of data permitted correlation of results with anatomic regions of the colon or because they were relevant to inherited colorectal cancer.  RESULTS OF THE ANALYSIS: Differences were noted in biologic properties of proximal and distal segments of normal fetal and adult colonic epithelium and in the epidemiologic, pathologic, cytogenetic, and molecular features of proximal and distal colorectal cancer.  Some differences correlated with the features of inherited colorectal cancer (proximal, nonpolyposis or distal, and polyposis forms).  CONCLUSIONS: Developmental and biologic differences in proximal and distal colon may reflect differing susceptibilities to neoplastic transformation.  Differences in proximal and distal colorectal cancer suggest that each may arise through different pathogenetic mechanisms.  Proximal tumors appear to represent a genetically more stable form of the disease and may arise through the same mechanisms that underlie inherited nonpolyposis colon cancer.  Distal tumors show evidence of greater genetic instability and may develop through the same mechanisms that underlie polyposis-associated colorectal cancer syndromes.
Localization and peptide content of endocrine pancreatic tumors.  Endocrine pancreatic tumors contain and frequently secret neurohormonal peptides.  This phenomenon can be used as a diagnostic and classifying tool.  This study analyzes 31 patients operated on because of an endocrine pancreatic tumor, including the diagnostic procedures and the localization methods.  In 15 insulinoma cases only 6 patients had a positive arteriography, while all 11 selective pancreatic vein samplings were positive.  The immunoreactivity showed that, besides insulin, most tumors also contained other peptides.  Of four gastrinoma cases the arteriography was positive in three, but the selective vein sampling localized the tumor in all.  The tumor's content of peptides showed mixed patterns.  In the four glucagonomas, the arteriography was positive in all and the venous sampling performed in three of the cases also was positive.  In five pancreatic polypeptide-containing tumors (PP-omas) the arteriography was positive in four and sampling performed in two was positive in both.  In the PP-omas the peptide pattern showed that these tumors frequently contain several peptides.  We used selective pancreatic vein sampling in 21 cases with positive result in all.  In the cases in which arteriography was negative, the sampling results helped the surgeon to find the tumor.  The peptide pattern in the tumors varied greatly and most tumors were multihormonal.
Localization and surgical treatment of occult insulinomas.  Management of patients with biochemical evidence of insulinoma and negative preoperative imaging studies (occult) tumors is controversial, varying from primarily medical management to aggressive, blind nearly total pancreatectomy to extirpate the tumor.  Since 1982, 12 consecutive patients with occult insulinoma underwent preoperative portal venous sampling (PVS) for insulin followed by surgical exploration with intraoperative ultrasound (IOUS).  Eleven of twelve patients (92%) had insulinoma removed and were cured.  Portal venous sampling correctly predicted the location of the insulinoma in 9 patients (75%) and that no tumor would be found in another patient.  A fourfold insulin gradient in the pancreatic tail of one patient correctly predicted that a distal pancreatectomy would remove the insulinoma despite the fact that neither palpation nor IOUS identified any tumor.  Intraoperative ultrasound was the single best method to identify occult tumors because it correctly identified 10 of 11 insulinomas that were found, including five pancreatic head tumors that were not palpable.  Palpation identified five insulinomas.  Of the 10 tumors that were identified during operation by palpation or ultrasound, IOUS identified significantly more (100% versus 50%, p = 0.03) and guided the successful enucleation of each.  The results support the strategy of preoperative PVS and operation with IOUS to localize and remove insulinoma in patients with occult tumors.  Most tumors (75%) will be correctly localized to a specific pancreatic region by preoperative PVS and identified by IOUS (83%), allowing simple enucleation and biochemical correction of hypoglycemia.  Morbid blind pancreatic resections are no longer indicated and long-term medical management of hypoglycemia should be reserved for the occasional patient (8%) who fails preoperative PVS and operation guided by IOUS.
Successful Fontan-type operation for a nonresectable right ventricular tumor.  A large intracavitary right ventricular tumor in a 24-year-old patient was considered nonresectable because it involved the interventricular septum, the free ventricular walls, and the tricuspid valve.  Surgical palliation consisted of closure of the tricuspid and pulmonary valves, and the right atrium was anastomosed to the pulmonary artery bifurcation.  The patient is asymptomatic 7 years after operation, and the neoplasm (a rhabdomyoma) has not increased in size.
Mediastinal hibernoma, a rare tumor.  Hibernoma is an uncommon soft tissue tumor that is derived from the remnants of fetal brown fat.  Review of the world medical literature revealed 90 cases, 6 of which were intrathoracic.  We present the seventh case of intrathoracic hibernoma; in this case, the hibernoma was within the mediastinum without direct invasion of other structures.
Systemic therapy in metastatic colorectal cancer.  Fluorouracil-based chemotherapy regimens have been utilized in metastatic colorectal cancer for more than 30 years.  Early attempts at defining an optimal treatment schedule and use in combination with other drugs failed to significantly improve results.  In contrast, the clinical effectiveness of fluorouracil has been improved by continuous infusion administration and modulation with folinic acid.  Both approaches have increased the response rate compared with results achieved with traditional bolus schedules; the effect on survival has been less significant.  Unfortunately, expense and, in some instances, toxicity have also been increased, which detracts from their overall usefulness.  Clinical studies that evaluate fluorouracil chemotherapy in combination with biological-response modifiers are ongoing and will be areas of intense research during the next few years.
Needle-localized mammographic lesions. Results and evolving treatment strategy.  From January 1981 to December 1987, 932 needle-localization breast biopsies were performed at our institution for mammographically detected abnormalities.  We reviewed 531 needle-localization breast biopsy procedures performed during two periods (January 1981 to June 1984, n = 311; and January to August 1987, n = 220) to compare results and treatment patterns, and to determine the prevalence of the missed lesions.  Mammographic abnormalities detected on routine screening accounted for a larger proportion of needle-localization breast biopsies in the later series (94 [30%] of 311 vs 94 [43%] of 220).  However, the rate at which carcinoma was identified remained constant at 29% as did the percentage of cancers that were invasive (46% vs 51%).  Overall, the rate of malignant diagnoses after needle-localization breast biopsy was lowest in asymptomatic women undergoing routine screening mammography (44 [24%] of 188) and significantly higher in women undergoing mammographic follow-up of the contralateral breast after treatment for breast cancer (28 [43%] of 65).  There were seven missed lesions in 531 needle-localization breast biopsies, necessitating a second procedure in six and interval mammograms in one.
Hepatic vein reconstruction for preserving remnant liver function.  Hepatic malignancies often infiltrate to the major hepatic vein.  Recently, we performed hepatic resection combined with hepatic vein reconstruction for preserving remnant liver function in three such patients.  One patient had a saphenous vein graft.  Postoperative liver function of the patients who underwent hepatic vein reconstruction was compared with those of eight patients who underwent hepatic resection of segments VII and VIII.  The right hepatic vein in four of them was resected and in the remaining four was preserved by skeletalization using an ultrasonic aspirator.  Although four patients with right hepatic vein resection showed severe lowering of liver function after surgery, the postoperative course of patients with preservation or reconstruction of the right hepatic vein maintained good liver function.  Liver regeneration of three patients with hepatic vein reconstruction was good on computed tomography.  Besides this report, to our knowledge, there is no other report of hepatic vein reconstruction for preserving the remnant liver function.  Problems with hepatic resection combined with hepatic vein reconstruction are discussed.  We conclude that hepatic vein reconstruction is one of the means for extending indication of the malignant tumor resection of the liver.
The papillary-cystic neoplasm of the pancreas. An increasingly recognized clinicopathologic entity.  The clinical course of the papillary-cystic neoplasm of the pancreas is contrasted with that of the pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.  The former occurs predominantly in young women, has a low malignant potential, and is highly curable with surgical treatment.  Three cases are reported that illustrate the typical clinical features and the indolent nature of the tumor.  One case was discovered after blunt abdominal trauma resulted in rupture of the tumor and hemoperitoneum.  All cases were treated by pancreatic resection with preservation of the spleen, an important consideration in younger patients.  All patients were free of disease at long-term follow-up.  Increasing awareness of this tumor has resulted in the reclassification of several tumors and should lead to better recognition by surgeons caring for patients with pancreatic diseases.
Molecular phenotype of a pediatric small round cell tumor.  Molecular probes were used to characterize an unusual small round cell abdominal tumor arising from the fallopian tube of a 15-year-old girl.  DNA and RNA extracted from the tumor and adjacent normal tissue was subjected to Southern and Northern blot analysis using a variety of different probes.  N-myc oncogene RNA was greatly expressed in the tumor, but was not expressed in normal tissue or amplified in chromosomal DNA.  Insulin-like growth factor II RNA was similarly overexpressed in the neoplasm, but not in normal tissue.  While histopathologic studies could not distinguish between a neuroectodermal neoplasm and Wilms' tumor, electron microscopy and the pattern of gene expression was most consistent with Wilms' tumor.
Decrease in cerebral metabolic rate of glucose after high-dose methotrexate in childhood acute lymphocytic leukemia.  We measured changes in the regional cerebral metabolic rate of glucose (rCMRGlu) using 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose and positron emission tomography for the assessment of neurotoxicity in childhood acute lymphocytic leukemia treated with high-dose methotrexate (HD-MTX) therapy.  We studied 8 children with acute lymphocytic leukemia (mean age: 9.6 years) treated with HD-MTX (200 mg/kg or 2,000 mg/M2) therapy.  CMRGlu after HD-MTX therapy was most reduced (40%) in the patient who had central nervous system leukemia and was treated with the largest total doses of both intrathecal MTX (IT-MTX) and HD-MTX.  CMRGlu in the whole brain after HD-MTX therapy was reduced by an average of 21% (P less than 0.05).  The reductions of CMRGlu in 8 patients were correlated with total doses of both IT-MTX (r = 0.717; P less than 0.05) and systemic HD-MTX (r = 0.784; P less than 0.05).  CMRGlu of the cerebral cortex, especially the frontal and occipital cortex, was reduced more noticeably than that of the basal ganglia and white matter.  We suggest that the measurement of changes in rCMRGlu after HD-MTX therapy is useful for detecting accumulated MTX neurotoxicity.
Photodynamic therapy in the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.  Photodynamic therapy is an experimental modality for tumor treatment based on the combined action of the tumor-localizing agent, ie, hematoporphyrin derivative, and red light.  From 1985 through 1989, 26 patients were treated using hematoporphyrin-derived drugs and 630-nm light delivered by a tunable dye laser.  All patients had biopsy-proved squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck, and they had either failed the traditional treatment modalities or refused conventional therapies.  Histological complete responses were achieved in 20 (77%) of 26 patients and partial responses in 5 (19%) of 26 patients for periods up to 48 months.  Only minimal toxic reaction was noted in the group.  As a guide to treatment planning for a patient group with large tumors, we used an optical dosimetry model based on tissue optics.  The rate of complete responses to this treatment was 8 (73%) of 11.  Our data indicate that photodynamic therapy is capable of inducing significant clinical and histological responses in the majority of those treated, and in some patients a prolonged response is produced.  In certain select head and neck malignancies, photodynamic therapy has an important role as a treatment modality.
Improving diagnostic accuracy of cervical metastases with computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging.  Elective neck dissection in patients with head and neck cancer continues to be controversial.  The management of these patients would be greatly facilitated by improvements in predicting cervical metastases.  Recent investigations have suggested that computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging are more sensitive in detecting cervical metastases than physical examination.  The Department of Otolaryngology at the Ohio State University Hospitals, Columbus, undertook a prospective study to compare the preoperative sensitivities of physical examination, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging with pathologic findings in 27 patients undergoing neck dissections for head and neck cancer.  The results indicate that computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging were more sensitive (84% and 92%, respectively) than physical examination (75%), although the results did not achieve statistical significance.  The sensitivity of combined computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging was 90%.
Reliability of colposcopy and directed punch biopsy   A group of 118 women underwent laser cone biopsy.  Data were collected routinely on proforma case notes and entered into a computerized database.  The histology of the cone biopsies was compared with that of previous, colposcopically directed punch biopsies, with the cytology of smears taken in the clinic and with the colposcopic diagnosis.  The punch biopsy had a 54% false negative rate and neither of the two microinvasive carcinomas biopsied in this way were detected by the biopsy.  Ten of 24 women with negative punch biopsies had CIN III in the cone.  When the punch biopsy showed CIN II or worse, the cone biopsy confirmed the presence of CIN in 86%.  There was some evidence of false negative cone biopsies.  The data suggest that management should not be based solely upon the punch biopsy result but should include consideration of the cytology and colposcopy findings.  Excisional methods of treatment are more likely to reveal early invasion and adenocarcinoma-in-situ.
Lipiodol computerized tomography: how sensitive and specific is the technique in the diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma?  Computerized tomography (CT) following the intra-arterial injection of Lipiodol (Lipiodol-CT) was performed on 60 patients suspected of having a hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).  Four main patterns of uptake of the Lipiodol within the liver were seen on CT.  Of the 14 well circumscribed lesions with dense homogeneous uptake of Lipiodol, 13 were confirmed to be HCCs.  Of the 25 lesions with dense patchy uptake of Lipiodol at the periphery and/or in the centre, 19 were confirmed to be HCCs.  In 18 patients, in whom only ill defined faint patchy uptake of Lipiodol was present in the liver, or in whom no hepatic uptake was present at all, only one patient was found later to have an HCC.  Of the three hypodense lesions in the liver with no Lipiodol uptake, one was found to be necrotic HCC, one a cholangiocarcinoma and one a regenerative nodule.  In the diagnosis of HCC, Lipiodol-CT had an overall sensitivity of 97.1%, an accuracy of 88.3% and a specificity of 76.9%.  Of the 34 patients with HCC, only 23 were solitary at diagnosis.  The size of the HCCs ranged from 0.8 cm to 11 cm in diameter with the median size at 2.2 cm.  Eleven of 34 HCCs (32.3%) were resectable.  We conclude that, as part of a screening programme for high risk patients.  Lipiodol-CT is useful in the early detection of HCCs.  The technique also plays an important role in determining whether the tumour should be resected or managed with chemotherapy.  By detecting HCCs while still small, the resectability rate can also be improved.
Clinical management of port-wine stain in infants and young children using the flashlamp-pulsed dye laser.  The flashlamp-pulsed dye laser (FLPDL) at 585 nm, a wavelength well absorbed by oxyhemoglobin, causes highly selective vascular injury.  In addition, the 450 microsecond pulse duration produced by this laser approximates the thermal relaxation time for dermal blood vessels thereby confining the energy to the target.  This new laser effects excellent lightening of port-wine stain (PWS) in infants and young children without the adverse complications of hypertrophic scarring, permanent pigmentation abnormality, or textural changes, complications often seen with conventional laser systems.  The FLPDL now permits treatment of this patient population expected to gain the most benefit from early laser therapy in a much safer manner, before the psychological complications of being a "marked" person develop.  The purpose of this report is to: (1) describe the theoretical considerations behind achieving selective removal of PWS that can be understood and used by a nonsurgically-oriented practitioner; and (2) describe the practical application of the device used in the clinical management of infants and young children.
Erythrocyte stearic acid desaturation in patients with colorectal carcinoma.  The erythrocyte stearic:oleic acid ratio (saturation index) was investigated as a means of differentiating between control subjects (n = 146) and patients with benign (n = 48) and malignant (n = 117) colorectal disease and patients undergoing postoperative follow-up after curative resection (n = 49).  Erythrocyte fatty acid profiles were determined by gas liquid chromatography.  Neither age, sex, Dukes' stage, nor degree of differentiation of the tumors had a significant effect on the erythrocyte saturation index.  The erythrocyte saturation index was lower in patients with primary and recurrent colorectal cancer compared with control subjects and patients with inflammatory bowel disease or benign colonic polyps (P less than 0.0001).  The erythrocyte saturation index was not found to be useful in the postoperative follow-up of these patients.  Using both saturation index and age as a means of differentiating between patients with primary colorectal cancer and control subjects gave a sensitivity of 67 percent and a specificity of 81 percent.
Characterization in vitro of a human tumor necrosis factor-binding protein. A soluble form of a tumor necrosis factor receptor.  Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) is a pleiotropic mediator of inflammatory responses.  A cysteine-rich, highly glycosylated 30-kD TNF-binding protein (TNF-BP) purified from urine may have a role in regulation because it protects in vitro against the biological effects of TNF.  The cytotoxic effect of TNF on the fibrosarcoma cell line WEHI 164 was inhibited by 50% at a 10-fold excess of TNF-BP.  The binding of TNF to the receptor was partially reversed after the addition of TNF-BP.  Results from biosynthetic labeling of cells with 35S-cysteine followed by immunoprecipitation with anti-TNF-BP indicated that TNF-BP is formed and released at the cell surface by cleavage because no corresponding cellular polypeptide was observed.  A cellular 60-kD polypeptide, which was immunoprecipitated with anti-TNF-BP, may correspond to the transmembrane TNF-receptor molecule and be the precursor of TNF-BP.  Thus, TNF-BP appears to be a soluble form of a transmembrane TNF-receptor.  Moreover our results demonstrate that the production of TNF-BP is increased when the TNF receptor is downregulated in cells by treatment with TNF or by activation of protein kinase C with phorbol esters.  TNF-BP may be an important agent that blocks harmful effects of TNF, and, therefore, useful in clinical applications.
Potent toxicity of 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine toward human monocytes in vitro and in vivo. A novel approach to immunosuppressive therapy.  Lymphoid cells were thought to be uniquely susceptible to excess 2'-deoxyadenosine (dAdo), when exposed to inhibitors of adenosine deaminase (ADA).  However, we now find that human monocytes are as sensitive as lymphocytes to dAdo or to the ADA-resistant congener 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine (CldAdo).  Monocytes exposed in vitro to CldAdo, or to dAdo plus deoxycoformycin rapidly developed DNA strand breaks.  Both the DNA damage and the toxicity of CldAdo or dAdo toward monocytes were blocked by deoxycytidine, but not by inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase.  A partial decrease in RNA synthesis and a gradual decline of cellular NAD were early biochemical events associated with monocyte DNA damage.  Low CldAdo concentrations (5-20 nM) inhibited monocyte phagocytosis and reduced the release of interleukin 6.  Higher CldAdo concentrations led to a dose- and time-dependent loss of monocyte viability.  Circulating monocytes disappeared within 1 wk in patients with cutaneous T cell lymphoma or with rheumatoid arthritis during continuous CldAdo infusion.  The marked sensitivity of human monocyte function and survival to CldAdo in vitro, together with the monocyte depletion in patients receiving CldAdo chemotherapy, suggests that CldAdo or other dAdo analogues offer a novel therapeutic strategy for chronic inflammatory and autoimmune diseases characterized by inappropriate monocyte deployment or function.
Elevated insulin receptor content in human breast cancer.  The growth of breast cancer cells is under the regulation of hormones, growth factors, and their receptors.  In the present study, we have employed a new, sensitive, and specific radioimmunoassay for the direct measurement of insulin receptors in surgical specimens of breast cancers.  In 159 specimens the insulin receptor content was 6.15 +/- 3.69 ng/0.1 mg protein.  This value was more than sixfold higher than the mean value found in both 27 normal breast tissues obtained at total mastectomy (0.95 + 0.68, P less than 0.001) and in six normal specimens obtained from reduction mammoplasty (0.84 +/- 0.78, P less than 0.001).  The insulin receptor content in breast cancer tissues was also higher than in any normal tissue investigated including liver (Pezzino, V., V.  Papa, V.  Trischitta, A.  Brunetti, P.A.  Goodman, M.K.  Treutelaar, J.A.  Williams, B.A.  Maddux, R.  Vigneri, and I.D.  Goldfine, 1989.  Am.  J.  Physiol.  257:E451-457).  The insulin receptor in breast cancer retained its ability to both bind insulin and undergo insulin-induced tyrosine kinase activation.  Immunostaining of the specimens revealed that the insulin receptor was present in malignant epithelial cells, but was not detected in stromal and inflammatory cells.  Univariant analysis revealed that the insulin receptor content of the tumors correlated positively with tumor size (P = 0.014), histological grading (P = 0.030), and the estrogen receptor content (P = 0.035).  There were no significant correlations between insulin receptor content and the age, body weight, menopausal status, and nodal involvement of the patients.  These studies indicate, therefore, that the insulin receptor content is increased in breast cancers and raise the possibility that the insulin receptor may have a role in the biology of these tumors.
Epidermal growth factor regulates the in vitro sensitivity of human ovarian carcinoma cells to cisplatin.  Cisplatin (DDP) is the most effective drug for the treatment of human ovarian cancer, but the mechanisms that determine sensitivity to the cytotoxic action of DDP are not well understood.  Treatment of two human ovarian carcinoma cell lines with epidermal growth factor (EGF) simultaneously increased sensitivity to DDP and caused a persistent change in morphology in the absence of any mitogenic effect.  Sensitization to DDP was shown to be dependent on both EGF concentration and EGF receptor number in C127 mouse fibroblasts expressing the human EGF receptor after transfection with a pBPV plasmid construct containing the human EGF receptor gene under control of the transferrin receptor 3'-inducible regulator.  Sensitization of human ovarian carcinoma cells to DDP was not blocked by inhibition of protein synthesis.  EGF did not enhance sensitivity to DDP or alter morphology in DDP-resistant human ovarian carcinoma cells despite the presence of functional EGF receptors on these cells.  These results showed that elements of the signal transduction pathway activated by EGF determined cellular sensitivity to DDP, and that a DDP-resistant phenotype is associated with a defect in this signal transduction pathway.
A phosphatase activity present in peripheral blood myeloid cells of chronic myelogenous leukemia patients but not normal individuals alters nuclear protein binding to transcriptional enhancers of interferon-inducible genes.  Cytoplasmic protein from peripheral blood myeloid cells of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) patients altered the electrophoretic mobility of complexes formed between nuclear proteins and interferon-inducible transcriptional enhancers.  Immature myeloid marrow cells (blasts and promyelocytes) have a higher level of this activity than do mature myeloid marrow cells (bands and polys).  This activity, which is not detectable in the peripheral blood cells of normal individuals, is at least 50-fold higher in CML marrow blasts and promyelocytes than that found in marrow blasts and promyelocytes of normal individuals.  This activity was inhibited by in vivo incubation of immature myeloid cells with the phosphatase inhibitor, sodium orthovanadate (0.2 mM), and by adding orthovanadate (20 mM) directly to cytoplasmic proteins of myeloid cells.  Interferon-alpha (1,000 U/ml) reduced the effects of the CML myeloid cell cytoplasmic protein on the electrophoretic mobility of nuclear protein-DNA complexes.  These data suggest that a unique phosphatase may be involved in the abnormalities in CML which are modulated by interferon-alpha.
Quality control practices in centralized tumor registries in North America.  A survey of quality control practices was mailed to 73 central registries in the U.S.  and Canada.  The response rate was 88%, with respondents representing a wide range of registry characteristics and reporting strategies.  While registries expressed different priorities in data use, 80% of respondents felt quality control data were important in the identification of problems.  The most common method of quality control was acceptance sampling (used by 97% of respondents), and took the form of visual review, recoding and edit checking.  Computer-based edit checks were almost universally used (95%).  Process control methods of any sort were used by only 22% of respondents with less than 4% of registries reporting formal quantitative criteria.  Sixty-one percent of respondents reported conducting one or more designed studies (e.g.  reabstracting or casefinding studies) but only 20% of those made the results public.  Greater emphasis should be placed on development of quantitative process controls, experimental design of quality control studies, and formal analyses and reporting of study results.
Chondrosarcoma of the head and neck.  Chondrosarcoma is a malignancy rarely encountered in the head and neck.  In an attempt to define this tumor's characteristics and response to therapy, all cases of chondrosarcoma treated at the University of Michigan over the past 25 years were retrospectively studied.  Fourteen cases originating in the nose and paranasal sinuses, mandible, temporal bone, and larynx were reviewed.  Aggressive surgical resection was the mainstay of treatment, and resulted in an overall survival of 70%, with an average follow-up of 3.5 years.  Survival was highest in primary temporal bone lesions, and lowest in paranasal sinus lesions.  Unresectable lesions were not cured by other modalities.  This study, therefore, continued to support the crucial role of wide surgical resection in the treatment of head and neck chondrosarcoma, but conservative resection, when needed to preserve important structures, has resulted in long-term survival.
The melanocyte and melanoma.  This paper reviewed some of the interesting biological aspects of melanocytes and their relationship to the nevus and to melanoma.  It also proposed a rationale for "adequate" surgery in the management of melanoma according to level, depth, margins, and trends in treatment.  These propositions were derived from an analysis of 995 cases of melanoma of the head and neck.
The Cancer Prevention Reminder System.  The Cancer Prevention Reminder System is a computer-based system designed to increase the delivery of periodic health maintenance procedures.  The program provides printed reminders that identify patients' overdue procedures, prints summary reports of the percentage of patients who are eligible and overdue for a procedure, and prints mailing labels for patients.  We performed a randomized, controlled trial in which the effects of computer-based reminders were compared with those of two other interventions among residents in a university-based group practice.
585 nm for the treatment of port-wine stains.  Although the flashlamp-pulsed-dye laser has been successfully used for the treatment of port-wine stains (PWS) at 577 nm, a number of adult patients had incomplete clearance of their birthmarks with this treatment modality because of residual vessels lying beyond the 0.75-mm penetration depth of 577-nm irradiation.  Fifteen adult patients, of whom nine were previously treated with limited success at 577 nm (group A), and six untreated patients (group B) were included in the study.  For the group A patients, treatment with 585 nm produced successful clearance of the birthmark.  For the six patients in group B, parallel treatment of different sites of the same lesion coupled with skin biopsies and histologic examination revealed that a change in the wavelength from 577 to 585 nm allowed the laser light to penetrate from the midreticular dermis into the subcutaneous fat.  This explained the clearance achieved at 585 nm and not at 577 nm.
Reasons why mastectomy patients do not have breast reconstruction.  Breast reconstruction after mastectomy is valuable, yet only a small percentage of eligible patients ever have reconstruction.  Little has been done to determine why so few patients proceed with reconstructive surgery.  A homogeneous population of mastectomy patients, some of whom underwent breast reconstruction while others did not, were surveyed regarding their attitudes about breast reconstruction.  A total of 245 women were surveyed.  One-hundred and fifty-eight (64 percent) responded, 71 of whom had been reconstructed while 87 had not.  Comparison of the responses of the two groups suggests factors that play a role in determining whether the mastectomy patient will accept or decline the option of breast reconstruction.  Considerations that made it less likely that a woman would pursue reconstruction included advanced age at the time of mastectomy, concern about complications from further surgery, uncertainty about outcome, and fear about the effect of reconstruction on future problems with breast cancer.  Marital status, receiving chemotherapy, or knowing a patient who had a bad result from reconstruction did not affect the decision.  An awareness and understanding of these factors may be helpful to physicians in counseling patients and in increasing the number of women who enjoy the benefits of breast reconstruction.
Mammographic measurements before and after augmentation mammaplasty.  Thirty-five augmented women underwent mammography using both the standard implant-compression technique and, when possible, the implant-displacement technique; all had preaugmentation film-screen mammography available for evaluation.  The area of mammographically visualized breast tissue before and after augmentation mammaplasty was measured using a transparent grid.  Patients with subglandular implants had a mean decrease of 49 percent of measurable tissue area with compression mammography and a 39 percent decrease with displacement mammography.  Patients with submuscular implants had a 28 percent decrease in measurable tissue area with compression mammography and a 9 percent decrease with displacement mammography.  Anterior breast tissue was seen better with displacement mammography; posterior breast tissue, with compression mammography.  Most patients had some degree of parenchymal scarring and lower image quality after augmentation.  State-of-the-art mammography was not possible in most patients augmented with silicone-gel-filled implants.
Combined tensor fasciae latae musculocutaneous flap and sartorius musculocutaneous flap for the repair of wide defects of the lower leg.  The tensor fasciae latae musculocutaneous flap has great advantages for reconstruction of the abdominal wall, but the medial border of its territory is limited to the thigh.  In order to expand the territory, a combined tensor fasciae latae musculocutaneous flap and sartorius musculocutaneous flap was devised.  This flap was successfully used to resurface a large defect in the lower leg as a distally based musculocutaneous flap.  The advantages of this flap are its extremely large territory, the fact that total necrosis of the flap cannot occur, and that as a proximally or distally pedicled flap it is suitable for large defects in the abdominal wall, lower leg, and gluteal region.
Metabolism of human gliomas: assessment with H-1 MR spectroscopy and F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose PET   Localized hydrogen-1 magnetic resonance (MR) spectroscopy and fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) were employed to obtain metabolic information from intracranial gliomas.  Advantages and difficulties associated with comparison of results from the two modalities were realized.  Forty patients were studied with H-1 MR spectroscopy.  MR signal intensities from lactate, N-acetylaspartate (NAA), choline, and creatine from a volume of interest containing the tumor and a contralateral volume were obtained and evaluated.  NAA signal intensities were generally decreased in the tumor spectra, and choline signal intensities were elevated.  H-1 MR spectroscopy was unsuccessful in eight patients, and FDG PET scans were not obtained in four of the patients with successful MR spectroscopic examinations.  Lactate signal intensity was detected in 10 of the 28 patients who had successful H-1 MR spectroscopic and FDG PET studies.  Lactate signal intensities were observed in lesions shown at FDG PET to be hypermetabolic, as well as in lesions found to be hypometabolic.
Chemical shift imaging of human brain: axial, sagittal, and coronal P-31 metabolite images.  Multivoxel magnetic resonance (MR) spectroscopy and novel data analysis techniques were developed to obtain high-quality phosphorus-31 metabolite images from the human brain and to overlay each metabolite distribution directly onto corresponding hydrogen-1 MR images.  The P-31 MR spectroscopic data were acquired by means of three-dimensional chemical shift imaging (phase encoding in three spatial dimensions) on a 1.5-T clinical instrument equipped with a specially designed quadrature P-31 birdcage coil constructed in the authors' laboratory.  Axial, sagittal, and coronal metabolite images based on the area for any one of five peak regions (phosphodiester; phosphocreatine; gamma, alpha, and beta adenosine triphosphate) were generated from 8 X 8 X 8 or 12 X 12 X 8 CSI arrays with voxel sizes of 27 cm3 and 12 cm3, respectively.  The positions of these images were aligned with anatomic features by means of the voxel-shifting capability of the Fourier transform.  Direct overlays of these metabolite images on corresponding proton images demonstrated excellent correlation with anatomy, factors indicating the utility of this technique for viewing P-31 metabolite levels in all areas of the brain simultaneously.
Rhabdomyosarcomas in the head and neck: MR imaging evaluation.  To determine the typical magnetic resonance (MR) signal intensity characteristics of rhabdomyosarcomas, short repetition time (TR)/short echo time (TE) (T1-weighted) and long TR (proton density and T2-weighted) images of 13 patients with rhabdomyosarcomas of the head and neck were retrospectively reviewed.  Seven patients received gadopentetate dimeglumine injections.  The most common MR appearance was that of a homogeneous mass, hyperintense to both muscle and fat on long TR/long TE images and isointense or minimally hyperintense to muscle on short TR/short TE images.  All lesions of the patients who received gadopentetate dimeglumine enhanced markedly.  Two lesions had intratumoral hemorrhage, and six were markedly heterogeneous in signal intensity.  Similar MR signal intensity patterns have been described for lymphomas and nasopharyngeal carcinomas.  The forte of MR imaging lies in its ability to delineate precisely the extent of the rhabdomyosarcoma.
Colorectal tumors: an in vitro study of high-resolution MR imaging.  To study the potential utility of magnetic resonance (MR) imaging in staging colorectal tumors, 15 resected colonic segments containing 17 elevated lesions were examined on a 1.5- or 1.9-T superconductive MR system.  The whole intestinal wall was apparent as three or five layers on images obtained with a short repetition time (TR) and short echo time (TE) and as six or eight distinct layers, including the intestinal wall proper as well as an adherent mucus layer and an outer layer of pericolonic fat, on the long TR/TE images.  In cases of colonic carcinoma, MR images correlated well with the pathologic findings, including the macroscopic growth pattern, depth of mural invasion, and the presence of foci of calcific tumor necrosis and pools of extracellular mucin (colloid).  These features suggest that MR imaging may be valuable in the clinical evaluation of colorectal tumors.
Hepatic tumors: signal enhancement at Doppler US after intravenous injection of a contrast agent.  Experiments were carried out to detect and establish the origin of Doppler and echo signal enhancement in small vessels of the systemic circulation and of tumors after intravenous injection of a contrast agent.  Eight woodchucks (Marmota monax) were studied; each woodchuck had naturally occurring hepatocellular carcinoma.  Injections of 0.1-4.0 mL of air-filled human serum albumin microspheres were administered into a hind limb or jugular vein.  Ultrasound (US) examination included transabdominal duplex scanning, color Doppler imaging, placement of a Doppler transducer on the exposed tumor, and surgical implantation of pulsed Doppler cuffs.  Doppler signals were assessed by recording color Doppler images and results of spectral analysis.  While subjective echo level was unaffected within the tumors, dramatic Doppler signal enhancement was recorded in both normal and tumor vessels.  At optimum dose levels, a signal gain of approximately 10 dB was recorded from the tumor.  Analysis showed that the echo enhancement was due to the presence of the contrast agent in branches of the hepatic artery.  These results suggest that tumor detection may be enhanced by intravenous administration of a US contrast agent.
Receptor imaging: application to MR imaging of liver cancer.  A new contrast agent for magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, directed to asialoglycoprotein (ASG) receptors on hepatocytes, was used for detection of liver cancer in rats.  Ultrasmall superparamagnetic (mean size, 12 nm) particles of iron oxide (USPIOs) were targeted to ASG receptors by coating particles with arabinogalactan (AG).  Liver T2 relaxation times decreased more effectively after a single intravenous administration of AG-USPIO than after an equal dose of a conventional superparamagnetic liver MR contrast agent (AMI-25; mean size, 72 nm).  Receptor affinity studies demonstrated that receptor-mediated attachment and subsequent cellular endocytosis do not occur in primary malignant (hepatocellular carcinoma) or metastatic (adenocarcinoma) tumors, because the surface ASG receptors are lost during malignant dedifferentiation.  In vitro relaxation and in vivo MR imaging experiments of liver tumors show that targeting USPIO to hepatocytes rather than to the mononuclear phagocytic system allows a considerable dose reduction, increases tumor-liver contrast, and potentially allows distinction of ASG-positive (benign hepatocellular) and ASG-negative (malignant hepatocellular) tumors.
Invasive papillary carcinoma of the breast: mammographic appearance.  The mammographic findings in 18 patients with invasive papillary carcinoma were studied retrospectively.  The mammograms of 10 patients showed a multinodular pattern, and seven patients had solitary nodules.  One patient had an irregular, ill-defined mass in the retroareolar region.  Two patients were found to have carcinoma in the contralateral breast, and two patients had intraductal carcinoma adjacent to the invasive papillary carcinoma.  The varied mammographic features that may occur with this rare breast malignancy are discussed.
Retroviral recombination and reverse transcription.  Recombination occurs at a high rate in retroviral replication, and its observation requires a virion containing two different RNA molecules (heterodimeric particles).  Analysis of retroviral recombinants formed after a single round of replication revealed that (i) the nonselected markers changed more frequently than expected from the rate of recombination of selected markers; (ii) the transfer of the initially synthesized minus strand strong stop DNA was either intramolecular or intermolecular; (iii) the transfer of the first synthesized plus strand strong stop DNA was always intramolecular; and (iv) there was a strong correlation between the type of transfer of the minus strand strong stop DNA and the number of template switches observed.  These data suggest that retroviral recombination is ordered and occurs during the synthesis of both minus and plus strand DNA.
Germ line p53 mutations in a familial syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neoplasms   Familial cancer syndromes have helped to define the role of tumor suppressor genes in the development of cancer.  The dominantly inherited Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is of particular interest because of the diversity of childhood and adult tumors that occur in affected individuals.  The rarity and high mortality of LFS precluded formal linkage analysis.  The alternative approach was to select the most plausible candidate gene.  The tumor suppressor gene, p53, was studied because of previous indications that this gene is inactivated in the sporadic (nonfamilial) forms of most cancers that are associated with LFS.  Germ line p53 mutations have been detected in all five LFS families analyzed.  These mutations do not produce amounts of mutant p53 protein expected to exert a trans-dominant loss of function effect on wild-type p53 protein.  The frequency of germ line p53 mutations can now be examined in additional families with LFS, and in other cancer patients and families with clinical features that might be attributed to the mutation.
Biopsy of the breast for mammographically detected lesions.  We prospectively studied 718 women who underwent biopsy of the breast for suspicious, mammographically detected mammary lesions in an attempt to identify key clinical risk factors, as well as roentgenographic characteristics associated with the appearance of early carcinoma of the breast.  Patients with a benign outcome had an average age of 55 years versus 63 years for patients with carcinoma of the breast.  Seventy-six per cent of these patients had no previous history of mammary problems, 20 per cent had a positive family history for carcinoma of the breast, 58 per cent were premenopausal and 21 per cent had used birth control pills.  Except for age (p less than 0.001), the distribution of clinical risk factors was equal among patients with benign or malignant outcomes.  Suspicious mammographic findings included mass lesions (53 per cent), calcifications (36 per cent) and the association of both (11 per cent).  The predominant Wolfe pattern on mammography was P1 (36 per cent).  No relationship was observed between Wolfe pattern and malignant conditions.  In this group of patients, mammography was poorly specific; however, the positive predictive value increased with age and is related to the age-specific prevalence of carcinoma of the breast.  Eight hundred and twenty-five lesions were removed.  Twenty-five per cent (n = 203) of the specimens taken at biopsy contained carcinoma.  Stellate mass lesions were highly suggestive of a malignant growth (p less than 0.0001).  No relationship between the size of the suspicious mammographic mass and the malignant lesion was observed.  A marked correlation (chi-square test with Yate's correction) was observed between malignant tumor and lesions with a linear or branching pattern, more than 15 calcifications, or small sized calcifications.  The presence of a mass with calcifications was associated with carcinoma in 34 per cent.  The incidence of invasive carcinoma was much higher for mass lesions (81 per cent) than for suspicious calcifications (56 per cent) (p less than 0.0001).
Trends in conserving treatment of invasive carcinoma of the breast in females.  This population-based study presents trends in the treatment of node-negative invasive carcinoma of the breast in females during the 1980s in the Detroit metropolitan area.  It was done to determine whether or not there has been a significant shift toward conservation of the breast from 1980 to 1987.  Trend analyses of surgical treatment, tumor size, node status, year of diagnosis, age and race were performed for 13,217 patients drawn from the Metropolitan Detroit Cancer Surveillance System.  A significant increase in the use of conserving the breast was observed, with younger women receiving this treatment option more often than older women.  Implications for a continuing shift in the biologic findings and treatment of carcinoma of the breast are discussed.
Correlation between hyperthermoradiosensitivity and clinical effect in carcinoma of the esophagus.  The correlation between hyperthermoradiosensitivity evaluated by an in vitro succinate dehydrogenase inhibition (SDI) test and the histopathologic effects of hyperthermochemoradiotherapy (HCR therapy) were investigated in 43 patients with carcinoma of the esophagus.  The succinate dehydrogenase (SD) activity of tissue fragments taken at biopsy was assayed after exposure to heat (43 degrees C.) and radiation (6 grays) was done.  The sensitivity to radiation plus heat treatment was estimated by the percentage of SD activity of the treated cells, compared with that of the control cells.  The 43 patients were divided into three groups according to the degree of SD activity after exposure to radiation plus heat treatment.  The SD activity was less than 50 per cent in group 1 (highly sensitive), between 50 and 70 per cent in group 2 (moderately sensitive), more than 70 per cent in group 3 (less sensitive).  Eighteen of 20 in group 1, 11 of 17 in group 2 and two of six in group 3 were classified as being histopathologically "effective" for HCR therapy.  The two year survival rate for groups 1, 2 and 3 were 55.5, 34.9 and zero per cent, respectively, while there were no statistical differences with regard to prognostic factors.  These data suggest that in vitro activities of SD correlate well with the clinical effectiveness of HCR therapy.  Therefore, it is recommended that a SD inhibition test be included among the guidelines for clinical management.
Therapeutic dilemmas associated with antenatally detected ovarian cysts.  Fifteen instances of ovarian cysts detected antenatally are reported.  Seven cysts more than 5 centimeters in diameter were treated surgically because of clinical signs, such as palpable abdominal mass, vomiting and abdominal distension.  Seven cysts less than 5 centimeters in diameter, and one cyst more than 5 centimeters in diameter began to regress spontaneously within six months after birth.  Because the pathophysiologic nature of neonatal ovarian cysts has not been elucidated and because the borderline between physiologic and pathologic factors is still unclear, we propose a more conservative approach in the management of neonatal ovarian cysts to avoid unnecessary operations.
Magnetic resonance imaging of vertebral osteoblastoma: a report of two cases.  Two patients with vertebral osteoblastoma evaluated with computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging are presented.  A literature review revealed that cases of osteoblastoma originating within the vertebral body are exceedingly rare.
Computed tomography and bronchoscopy in chest radiographically occult main-stem neoplasm diagnosis and Nd-YAG laser treatment in 8 patients.  We studied 8 adult patients with variable symptoms of cough, dyspnea, stridor, wheezing, or hemoptysis.  Fiberoptic bronchoscopy in all showed complete or nearly complete endobronchial obstruction of a main-stem bronchus by neoplasm with a mean bronchial diameter of 1.9 mm +/- 1.6 mm (mean +/- standard deviation).  In 4 patients, a lobar bronchus was also completely obstructed.  No mass was visible on chest radiographs of any patient; however, computed tomography in each showed main-stem endobronchial obstruction, lobar obstruction (4 instances in 3 patients), and in 6 patients hypoperfusion of the involved lung.  Computed tomographic scan showed additional abnormalities that were unsuspected on viewing chest radiographs or at bronchoscopy, including mediastinal adenopathy in 3 patients and an extraluminal tumor component in 4.  After therapy with Nd-YAG laser, main-stem airway diameter increased to a mean of 9.6 mm +/- 1.0 mm (P less than .05) and pulmonary functions improved.  Results suggest the complementary role of computed tomography and fiberoptic bronchoscopy in the detection and laser-treatment planning of chest radiographically occult severe neoplastic obstruction of the main-stem bronchus.
Correlation of free phenytoin to serum albumin in cancer patients.  The objectives of this study were to compare the total and free phenytoin serum concentrations of cancer patients with hypoalbuminemia with those of cancer patients with normal serum albumin and to correlate the percentage of free phenytoin with the albumin concentration.  A total of 22 patients were studied, 13 with normal albumin concentration and 9 with low albumin.  The mean free phenytoin in the normal albumin group was 9.9 (+/- 1.3) percent and 17.6 (+/- 4.6) percent in the low albumin group.  With the groups combined, the mean free phenytoin was 13.1 percent (range 8.3-22.2) with the albumin range of 20-45 g/L.  There was a significant negative correlation (r = -0.9, p less than 0.001) between the percentage of free phenytoin and the measured serum albumin.  In cancer patients, the serum albumin concentration appears to be the key factor that determines the percentage of free phenytoin.  In cancer patients with low serum albumin concentration, the total and free phenytoin concentration should be measured for adequate assessment of phenytoin therapy.
Fine-needle aspiration cytology and flow cytometry of intracystic papillary carcinoma of breast   To define criteria for cytologic diagnosis of intracystic papillary carcinoma (ICPC), the authors retrospectively reviewed the fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytologic specimens of eight cases of histologically proven ICPC of breast.  The patients were five black and three white women, 56-87 years of age.  The FNA specimen was cyst fluid in four cases (bloody in three, clear in one).  All the aspirates showed cellular smears with small and large clusters of cells with papillary and/or cribriform configurations and numerous single epithelial cells.  The cells were cuboidal to columnar with minimal atypia.  ICPC was suggested by FNA in each case, and all the patients underwent surgical excision or mastectomy.  Flow cytometry, performed on fresh FNA specimen in one case and on paraffin-embedded surgical tissue in all eight cases, showed seven tumors to be aneuploid and one to be diploid.  The authors contend that ICPCs of breast have distinct cytomorphologic features that can be recognized by FNA.  Because ICPC may present in cyst fluid, either bloody or clear, all breast cyst fluids from postmenopausal women should be examined cytologically.  Flow cytometric demonstration of an aneuploid population may assist in confirming malignancy in this lesion.
Immunocytochemical profile of benign and carcinomatous effusions. A practical approach to difficult diagnosis.  One of the great challenges in the cytodiagnosis of effusions is the distinction between reactive mesothelium/histiocytes and cancer cells.  This is notably true in patients having undergone radiation and/or chemotherapy.  To establish whether monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) could be used as reliable diagnostic adjuvants, the authors retrospectively and blindly studied 60 cases diagnosed by standard cytologic criteria (malignant, benign, and equivocal), with a panel of seven readily available MoAbs (cytokeratins, vimentin, EMA, B72.3, alpha-CEA, HMFG-2, and Leu-M1) and the lectin Ulex europaeus I.  All 18 (100%) malignant cases showed reactivity with EMA and HMFG, whereas 17 (95%) and 11 (61%) reacted with B72.3 and alpha-CEA, respectively.  Combinations of (1) EMA + B72.3, (2) EMA + alpha-CEA, and (3) EMA + alpha-CEA + B72.3 displayed positivity in 17 (95%), 11 (61%), and 10 (56%) malignant cases, respectively.  Of the 18 benign cases, 7 reacted with HMFG and 2 each with EMA and B72.3.  Only one case (5.5%) reacted with both EMA and B72.3.  Based on these results, the 24 equivocal cases were regrouped into 14 malignant and 10 benign cases.  Follow-up effusions obtained within the ensuing three months in all these patients allowed the authors to unequivocally confirm the diagnosis in all but five.  The combination of EMA and B72.3 MoAbs detected malignant cells in 95% of the cases, with a 3.5% incidence of false positive cases in this study.  A panel of EMA, B72.3, and alpha-CEA MoAbs should prove the most useful and simple approach to the correct diagnosis in most questionable effusions.  Some of the potential pitfalls are discussed.
The association of selected cancers with service in the US military in Vietnam. II. Soft-tissue and other sarcomas. The Selected Cancers Cooperative Study Group   As part of a series of investigations into the health of Vietnam veterans, we conducted a population-based, case-control study of soft-tissue and other sarcomas between 1984 and 1988.  All men born between 1929 and 1953 and diagnosed in an area covered by eight cancer registries were considered eligible.  Controls were selected by random-digit dialing.  Analyses of 342 men with pathologically confirmed sarcoma and 1776 controls showed that Vietnam veterans had a relative risk of 1.0 for sarcoma in comparison with men who did not serve in Vietnam (95% confidence interval, 0.6 to 1.6).  Restriction of the analysis to the 254 men with soft-tissue sarcoma yielded a relative risk of 0.9 (95% confidence interval, 0.5 to 1.6).  Several attributes of military service in Vietnam (eg, branch, duration of service, military region, and other characteristics that may have been associated with the use of Agent Orange) were examined, and none was associated with an increased risk for the development of sarcoma.  Furthermore, no morphologic type of sarcoma was overrepresented among Vietnam veterans.  Results were unchanged if Vietnam veterans were compared with (1) other veterans or (2) men who never served in the military.  This study, which had 97% power to detect a relative risk of 2.0 for all sarcomas, provides no evidence that the risk for the development of soft-tissue or other sarcomas is increased among veterans 15 to 25 years following service in Vietnam.
Generation of human monoclonal antibodies against colon cancer.  Lymphocytes from regional lymph nodes of patients with colon cancer were fused with a human lymphoblastoid cell line with or without in vitro immunization.  The efficacy of these two protocols for the generation of human monoclonal antibodies against colon cancer was investigated.  The hyperplastic lymph nodes adjacent to the tumor were the best source of B lymphocytes.  Fusion frequency and the number of tumor-reactive clones were markedly increased when the in vitro immunization protocol was applied prior to fusion.  As a stimulant in in vitro immunization, the supernatant of pokeweed mitogen-stimulated T lymphocytes was superior to the supernatant of mixed lymphocytes culture.  Carcinoembryonic antigen at 20 micrograms/L seemed to be the optimal dose for in vitro immunization.  The reactivities of human monoclonal antibodies thus generated were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and confirmed by immunoperoxidase staining.  Combining in vitro immunization with lymphocytes of cancer patients may lead to the successful production of clinically useful human monoclonal antibodies.
Detection of primary colorectal cancer with indium 111 monoclonal antibody B72.3.  B72.3 is a murine monoclonal antibody of the immunoglobulin subclass IgG1 directed against TAG-72, a cell surface antigen present on colorectal carcinoma cells.  We investigated the utility of scanning with indium 111-labeled B72.3 in 16 patients with a high clinical suspicion of or biopsy-proven primary colorectal cancer.  Each patient received 1 or 2 mg of B72.3 monoclonal antibody labeled with 152 MBq of indium 111.  Patients underwent scanning 2 to 3 days and 7 days after infusion by planar and emission computed tomography.  Nineteen lesions were confirmed in 12 patients.  Three patients with benign polyps had true-negative monoclonal antibody scans.  Indium 111-labeled imaging of B72.3 detected nine of 19 lesions.  Unsuspected tumor sites were identified by monoclonal antibody scan in three patients.  By detection of additional abdominal disease and extra-abdominal spread, indium 111-labeled scanning of B72.3 directly affected treatment in 18% of patients.
Oral contraceptives and breast cancer. Review and meta-analysis.  To evaluate the relation between use of oral contraceptives and the incidence of breast cancer, the authors reviewed the epidemiologic literature and used quantitative methods to summarize the data.  Study results for any use of oral contraceptives were pooled using a model that accounted for both interstudy and intrastudy variability.  The authors also explored interstudy variability and modeled a duration-effect relation between oral contraceptive use and breast cancer.  Case-control and follow-up studies were considered separately.  Overall, the authors observed no increase in the risk of breast cancer for women who had ever used oral contraceptives, even after a long duration of use.  These results were consistent across study design.  However, data combined from case-control studies revealed a statistically significant positive trend (P = 0.001) in the risk of premenopausal breast cancer for women exposed to oral contraceptives for longer duration.  This risk was predominant among women who used oral contraceptives for at least 4 years before their first term pregnancy (relative risk = 1.72; 95% confidence interval = 1.36 to 2.19).  Additional study is required to determine whether this finding in a subgroup of exposed women is confirmed and whether the risk remains increased with advancing age.
Predictive value of tumor estrogen and progesterone receptor levels in postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer treated with toremifene.  The predictive value of estrogen receptor (ER) concentrations was evaluated in a group of 113 postmenopausal patients with estrogen-receptor-positive (ER greater than 7 fmol/mg protein) advanced breast cancer.  In 103 patients, tumors were also sampled for progesterone receptor (PgR) determination.  All patients were treated with toremifene, a novel antiestrogen, 60 mg daily.  The median ER in 51 responders was 78 fmol/mg protein, and in 62 nonresponders, 51 fmol/mg protein; the median PgR levels were 40 and 37 fmol/mg protein, respectively.  The response rate in patients with ER less than 50 fmol/mg protein was 38%, and 51% in the group with ER greater than 50 fmol/mg protein (not significant [NS]).  The response rate in patients with PgR less than 10 fmol/mg protein was 42%, and in patients with greater than 10 fmol/mg protein, 44%.  The duration of response in patients with ER greater than 50 fmol/mg protein was significantly longer than with lower ER levels (P = 0.002).  PgR was not associated with the duration of response.  In Cox's multiple regression analysis, ER was an independent prognostic factor (P = 0.005) for response duration.  Thus, the ER concentration of tumor tissue predicts the duration of response but not the response rate to toremifene in patients with advanced breast cancer.  The PgR status does not predict the response rate or the duration of response.
Low-dose preoperative radiation postpones recurrences in operable rectal cancer. Results of a randomized multicenter trial in western Norway.  A randomized, multicenter clinical trial was conducted in Western Norway to study the effectiveness of preoperative radiation therapy in operable rectal cancer, given at a dosage of 3150 cGy in 18 fractions, 2 to 3 weeks before radical surgery.  Three hundred nine patients were entered into the trial between May 1976 and December 1985.  After radiation no tumor was seen in 4.5% of the patients.  There was no increased morbidity or mortality at surgery.  The 5-year survival for evaluable patients was 57.5% in the control group and 56.7% in the radiotherapy group.  For patients operated on for cure the 5-year survival was 60.9% and 64.2% in the control group and radiotherapy group, respectively.  Radiation significantly delayed both local and distant recurrences in patients in the radiation group who had curative resection from 13.3 months in controls to 27.1 months.  The local recurrence rate in the corresponding groups was 21.1% and 13.7%, respectively.  We conclude that higher preoperative radiation doses should be used in new trials as a higher dosage may transform the observed positive effects into a survival benefit.
Comparison of lymphangiography and computed tomography scanning in evaluating abdominal disease in stages III and IV Hodgkin's disease. A Southwest Oncology Group study.  The authors reviewed the records of 139 patients who had laparotomy plus computed tomography (CT) and/or lymphangiograms (LAG) as part of a their staging workup for Hodgkin's disease, in accordance with Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG) protocol 7808.  They evaluated the relative ability of CT and LAG to detect disease in the abdomen.  Two regions of the abdomen were designated, the upper and the lower, to further examine the capabilities of CT and LAG in the lower abdomen and CT in the upper abdomen.  A LAG was more sensitive (P less than 0.05) than CT in detecting positive lower abdominal nodes.  In the upper abdomen, CT scan had low sensitivity for detecting positive nodes, liver, or spleen.  This study suggests that LAG of the lower abdomen provided more information than CT, and therefore should not be abandoned as a valid method for detecting nodal disease.
Diffuse sclerosing variant of papillary carcinoma of the thyroid. Clinical importance, surgical treatment, and follow-up study.  A diffuse sclerosing variant is not very rare among papillary carcinomas of the thyroid when the patients are female and younger than 30 years of age.  The variant is characterized by diffuse involvement of one or both thyroid lobes, with dense sclerosis, patchy lymphocytic infiltration, and abundant psammoma bodies.  Controversy still exists concerning its prognosis.  We reviewed our experience with 14 patients treated between 1958 and 1988.  All patients were young females, their age being from 10 to 28 years with a mean of 19.6.  Hashimoto's thyroiditis had been suspected in nine patients before they came to our clinic.  Nowadays the diagnosis of this cancer is possible when we have this entity in mind and detect abundant psammoma bodies either by ultrasonography or by soft-tissue roentgenography of the neck.  Total thyroidectomy with modified neck dissection was carried out in eight patients, subtotal thyroidectomy with neck dissection in five, and lobectomy with neck dissection in one.  All of them are alive and well without distant metastasis at a mean follow-up of 16 years.  Because most of the patients with this variant of papillary carcinoma are young women and the prognosis is favorable, a complete resection without causing later recurrence, but also cosmetic and complication-free surgery, should be considered.
Can internal mammary chain treatment decrease the risk of death for patients with medial breast cancers and positive axillary lymph nodes?  The effect of internal mammary chain treatment on each type of malignant death-related event was analyzed in 1195 patients with operable breast cancer and histologically involved axillary lymph nodes.  A group of 135 patients who had no internal mammary chain treatment was compared with a control group of 1060 patients who were treated by surgery and/or postoperative radiation therapy.  In a multivariate analysis taking into account age, clinical size of the tumor, histoprognostic grading, and the number of positive axillary lymph nodes, quantitative interaction tests were used to determine whether the effects of internal mammary chain treatment on each type of malignant event were significantly different for patients with a lateral tumor compared with those with a medial tumor.  The authors found that the effects of this treatment on the risks of distant metastases and of secondary breast cancer were not the same for the patients with a medial tumor as for those with a lateral tumor.  For the untreated patients with a medial tumor, the risks of distant metastases and second breast cancer were, respectively, 1.6 (P = 0.02) and 2.9 (P = 0.02), compared with the treated patients.  Conversely, for women with lateral tumor, no difference between the two treatment groups was observed.  Thus, internal mammary chain treatment may improve long-term survival rate in patients with a medial tumor and positive axillary lymph nodes essentially by decreasing the risk of development of distant metastases (mainly brain, distant lymph nodes, multiple simultaneous metastases) and/or a secondary breast cancer.
The concept of locally advanced gastric cancer. Effect of treatment on outcome. The Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group.  In previous Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group (GITSG) reports, gastric cancer patients with locally unresectable disease, treated with combined radiation and chemotherapy had a shorter median survival (40 weeks) but more remained alive at 4 years (18%) when compared to those randomized to receive chemotherapy alone (76 weeks and 6%, respectively).  To further test the concept that combined modality therapy might increase the number of long-term survivors, a second protocol was designed, but with three major modifications.  A course of chemotherapy would precede the 5-fluorouracil-potentiated radiation therapy.  Doxorubicin would be added to the 5-fluorouracil plus methyl-CCNU combination.  Radiation therapy would be given as a single course of 4320 cGy, with 5-fluorouracil given daily for 3 days at the beginning and end of the course.  Median survival of 46 patients treated with chemotherapy alone was 59 weeks, with 11% alive after 3 years.  Following combined modality therapy, median survival was 62 weeks, but only 7% lived 3 years.  Although the problem of early deaths in the combined modality group was resolved, long-term survival with combination therapy was not demonstrated in this study.
Lack of relationship between perioperative blood transfusion and survival time after curative resection for gastric cancer.  To better comprehend the relationship between perioperative blood transfusion and survival time after curative gastrectomy for advanced gastric cancer, the authors reviewed retrospectively data on 568 patients treated in their clinics from 1965 to 1983.  Of these 568, 195 (34.3%) required no blood transfusion and 373 (65.7%) required transfusions within the perioperative period.  Univariate analysis indicated that the survival time of the transfusion recipients was significantly less than that of the patients who had no transfusions (P less than 0.01).  In subgroups of the authors' patients stratified to adjust for stage of disease, there was, however, no significant difference between the survival rates.  Subsequently, multivariate analysis, using the Cox regression analysis, which adjusted for sex, age, and other covariates, indicated that perioperative blood transfusion was not a useful factor for predicting survival time.  Multivariate analysis suggested that tumor size (P less than 0.01), degree of invasion into the gastric wall (P less than 0.01) and status of lymph node metastasis (P less than 0.01) were the most important covariates after curative gastrectomy for advanced gastric cancer.  The authors' findings revealed the lack of any relationship between perioperative blood transfusion and survival time of patients who underwent curative resection for advanced gastric cancer.
The effect of dietary omega-3 fatty acids (fish oil) on azoxymethanol-induced focal areas of dysplasia and colon tumor incidence.  MaxEPA (MA), a fish oil high in omega-3 fatty acids, was combined with various levels of corn oil (CO), rich in omega-6 fatty acids, and fed to female CF1 mice.  The three fish oil blends with CO and the two CO levels of the diets studied were as follows: 16.0% CO + 4.4% MA (Diet 1); 10.2% CO + 10.2% MA (Diet 2); 4.4% CO + 16.0% MA (Diet 3); 20.4% CO (Diet 4); and 4.4% CO (Diet 5).  The diets were provided 2 weeks before weekly subcutaneous injection of saline or azoxymethanol (AOM).  Studies of epithelial cell proliferation and the incidence of focal areas of dysplasia (FAD) involved six weekly AOM injections.  One week after the last AOM injection and 1 hour before killing, mice were injected with tritiated thymidine (3HTdR).  No differences in any proliferative parameters were found among the five groups of saline-treated mice.  Among the AOM-treated animals, those fed Diet 3 showed significantly fewer cells per crypt and significantly fewer labeled cells/gland than CO Diets 4 and 5.  Additionally, the distribution of S-phase cells in crypts of AOM-treated mice fed Diet 3 most closely resembled that of the saline controls.  The greatest alteration in the distribution of proliferative cells was observed in the high-CO diet (Diet 4) and the lowest MA level (Diet 1).  Mice fed Diets 2 and 3 had significantly fewer FAD/500 microns of distal colonic serial sections than those fed the high CO diet (Diet 4).  Mice involved in chronic tumor incidence studies received only three weekly injections of the same dose of AOM.  Regardless of diet, approximately 88% of all tumors arose in the distal colon.  A significantly larger tumor-bearing population was observed in both the high-CO Diet 4 and the lowest MaxEPA (MA) diet (Diet 1) compared with the incidence in MA Diets 2 and 3 and the low-CO Diet 5.  A diet with a ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids of approximately 1.0 apparently prevented the development of an adenoma-type proliferative pattern thereby reducing FAD numbers and subsequent tumor incidence.
Comparative study of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma. Clinical, histopathologic, and immunohistochemical analyses.  An important disease entity distinct from cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) in Japan is adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL), which usually shows the same phenotype as CTCL, i.e., a helper/inducer T-cell phenotype (CD4+CD8-), and usually involves the skin.  Clinically, both CTCL and ATL are heterogeneous in nature.  In this study, we demonstrated differences between CTCL and ATL in terms of clinical and immunopathologic cell surface features.  In patients with ATL, the predominant clinical findings were peripheral lymph node involvement, skin lesions, hepatosplenomegaly, leukemic manifestations, and an aggressive course.  In patients with CTCL, by contrast, only skin lesions predominated at the onset of the disease and a relatively good prognosis was demonstrated.  Phenotypic heterogeneity of ATL in the skin, i.e., CD4-CD8-, CD4+CD8-, and CD4-CD8+, was demonstrated.  Expression of Leu8, CD7 (Leu9), and CD45RA (2H4) was high in both the skin-infiltrating ATL cells and peripheral blood and lymph node ATL cells compared with that in the skin-infiltrating CTCL cells.  Expression of CD25 (IL-2R), CD71 (OKT9), HLA-DR, and HLA-DQ was higher in the skin-infiltrating ATL cells than in CTCL cells.  Expression of CD29 (4B4) was high, and that of CD45RA (2H4) was low in both the skin-infiltrating ATL and CTCL cells compared with the peripheral blood and lymph node ATL cells.  Expression of CD45RO (UCHL-1) was not significantly high in the skin-infiltrating CTCL cells compared with that in ATL cells.  The most significant phenotypic difference between ATL cells and CTCL cells was the expression of Leu8 (lymph node homing receptor), CD7 and CD25 antigens on the cell surface, and the main phenotypic difference between skin-infiltrating ATL and CTCL cells and peripheral blood and lymph node ATL cells was the expression of CD29 and CD45RA.  These findings confirm that the difference in antigen expression on the cell surface might reflect the clinical features of ATL and CTCL, and suggest that the predominant phenotype of peripheral blood and lymph node ATL cells is that of naive, relatively immature or activated T-cells, and that CTCL cells are previously activated (memory) T-cells.  In other words, CTCL cells do not share the same origin as ATL cells.  These observations support the concept that ATL is a disease distinct from CTCL.
von Willebrand factor in head and neck cancer.  Laboratory abnormalities in blood coagulation factors are common in patients with cancer but the significance is unknown.  Twenty-eight patients with head and neck cancer were studied at the time of diagnosis.  Twenty-five were advanced-stage (III or IV) patients.  Levels of clotting factors, antithrombin III, and plasminogen were normal.  Levels of von Willebrand factor (vWF), both antigenic and functional (ristocetin cofactor), were elevated.  This group of patients were followed for a minimum of 41 months (median, 48 months).  Fifteen patients died within the follow-up period.  von Willebrand factor levels were significantly higher in these 15 than the 13 survivors.  Extreme elevation of ristocetin cofactor (greater than 300 U/dl) was seen in six of the 15 patients who died and in none of the survivors.  Plasma vWF is elevated in head and neck cancer and the level measured at the time of diagnosis may have prognostic and potentially therapeutic implications.
Abnormal vitamin B6 status in childhood leukemia.  Vitamin B6 is involved in many biological processes of potential relevance to carcinogenesis and tumor growth, including DNA synthesis and maintenance of immunocompetence, yet very little information exists on B6 nutritional status in childhood leukemia.  Using a radioenzymatic assay, the authors measured plasma pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP), the biologically active form of B6, in 11 newly diagnosed untreated children with leukemia and 11 age-matched controls.  The children with leukemia had significantly lower PLP levels than the controls.  In 26 additional leukemia patients and 26 additional controls, a high-performance liquid chromatography assay also demonstrated lower plasma PLP levels in childhood leukemia compared with controls.  These differences were significant for both acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and for acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia (ANLL).  The PLP values did not correlate with indices of leukemia cell burden, but did correlate with reported B6 intake, suggesting that illness-related diet changes are at least partially responsible for the low PLP levels.  Before any chemotherapy, overall nutritional status was suboptimal in 53% of ALL cases and 57% of ANLL cases.  Newly diagnosed children with leukemia have suboptimal overall nutrition as well as suboptimal vitamin B6 status.
Melanoma and soft tissue sarcoma in seven patients.  Seven patients with both melanoma and sarcoma were seen at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute (Boston, MA) over a 4-year period.  Three had additional malignant neoplasms; one of these patients also had the hereditary cutaneous malignant melanoma, dysplastic nevus syndrome.  These observations suggest the possibility of a biologic relationship between melanoma and sarcoma, the nature of which remains unknown.
The epidemiology of cancer among Hispanic women. The experience in Florida.  To explore cancer incidence among Hispanic women living in Dade County, Florida, data were analyzed from the statewide cancer registry.  For all but three sites, Hispanics had lower rates of the 15 most prevalent cancers than non-Hispanics.  However, higher rates of cancer among Hispanics were noted for cancers of the gallbladder, liver, and heart and soft tissue.  Subgroups of women had significantly higher rates of cervical cancer and thyroid cancer.  Lower rates among Hispanics were observed for cancers of the esophagus, vagina, breast, colon, buccal cavity and pharynx, and malignant melanoma.  These data suggest that most cancer sites traditionally higher among US Latino women were not higher among Dade Hispanics, and that sites more common among non-Hispanics have not yet shown an increased incidence among Hispanic women in Dade County.
Increasing incidence of cecal and sigmoid carcinoma. Data from the Connecticut Tumor Registry.  We have studied both the distribution and incidence of colorectal cancer using The Connecticut Tumor Registry, the oldest tumor registry in the United States.  During the time period 1973 to 1985, left-sided colon cancers accounted for 63% of the cancers, right-sided cancers 33%, and cancers with unspecified sites 4%.  Indeed, this pattern of distribution has remained constant for 25 years.  For the period 1935 to 1985, we calculated the sex-specific, age-adjusted (normalized to the 1970 U.S.  Census) incidence.  Age-adjusted incidence of rectal cancer has remained stable for 50 years: for men, 22.8 cases/100,000/year, and for women, 13.9 cases/100,000/year.  During these 50 years, the age-adjusted incidence of cecal carcinoma for men has increased from 3.6 to 16.7 cases/100,000/year, while for women, it has increased from 4.9 to 14.2 cases/100,000/year.  Sigmoid carcinoma for men has increased from 8.8 to 18.7 cases/100,000/year, and for women, it has increased from 7.7 to 12.8 cases/100,000/year.  The incidence of colon cancer at each site has been and continues to be increasing at a constant rate.  Age-adjusted incidence for all colorectal cancers has increased from 35.2 to 70.2 cases/100,000/year for men and from 32.1 to 49.2 cases/100,000/year for women.  Thus, distribution of colorectal cancers by site in Connecticut has remained stable for 25 years.  More importantly, however, the age-adjusted incidence of colon cancer has continued to increase for 50 years, whereas that of rectal cancer has remained relatively stable.
Bronchogenic carcinoma in situ on the carina eradicated by endobronchial biopsy.  Squamous cell carcinoma in situ of the bronchus is a rare disorder in an isolated clinical setting.  We present a case of carcinoma in situ located on the carina with excisional biopsy via a fiberoptic bronchoscope and no recurrence after five years.  To our knowledge, this represents the only case of carcinoma in situ treated solely with excisional biopsy.  This case further emphasizes the importance of securing biopsy specimens for all mucosal abnormalities and raises the possibility of limited excision as sole therapy for carcinoma in situ.
Clinical application of ras gene mutation for diagnosis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.  Most pancreatic adenocarcinomas are known to have ras gene (oncogene) mutations.  The site of the mutations is localized in codon 12 of K-ras gene.  Such high incidence and localization of the ras gene mutations have not been observed in any other human malignancies.  Polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing method enabled us to analyze DNA sequence around codon 12 of K-ras gene in small quantities of specimens obtained from needle biopsies and aspirate samples for pathological diagnosis.  All the materials obtained from 12 patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma showed the mutations, whereas those obtained from 6 patients with chronic pancreatitis showed no mutations.  In several cases using the mutations of K-ras gene as a marker, this analysis supplemented conventional pathology and cytology in making the diagnosis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.  The analysis of ras-gene mutations was useful for the clinical diagnosis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Modified Van Nes rotationplasty for osteosarcoma of the proximal tibia in children   Above-knee amputation has been the traditional treatment for osteosarcoma of the proximal tibia.  Recent advances in chemotherapy have encouraged the development of limb-salvage techniques.  Van Nes rotationplasty for malignant lesions of the distal femur has increased in popularity as a reconstructive technique, but no similar procedure has been described for lesions of the proximal tibia.  We have developed a modified rotationplasty for this lesion and have performed it in four children.  The surgical technique, postoperative management and results of the procedure are described.  Two patients had delayed wound healing.  No other complications have developed and our patients were disease-free at follow-up, while the appearance of the leg was well accepted by the patients and their parents.  This procedure is a useful addition to the armamentarium of the tumour surgeon for the treatment of malignant lesions of the proximal tibia.
Parosteal osteosarcoma. Treatment by wide resection and prosthetic replacement.  We have reviewed 20 cases of parosteal osteosarcoma treated by wide local resection and prosthetic replacement and followed up for six to 17 years.  Limb function was excellent in 85%.  One patient with grade III histological disease developed pulmonary metastases.  Four patients had local recurrences, which were related to repeated preliminary biopsies, inappropriate siting of biopsy and vascular encroachment by the tumour.  After this mode of treatment, the outcome was not related to medullary invasion by the tumour.
Embryologic fusion planes and the spread of cutaneous carcinoma: a review and reassessment.  It has long been held that embryologic fusion planes influence the spread of skin cancer.  Embryologic fusion planes have been implicated in the depth of invasion, horizontal spread, and recurrence of cutaneous carcinoma.  However, these structures have never been studied in detail.  A review of the surgical literature reveals considerable confusion regarding the exact nature, location, and tumor interactions of these fusion planes.  We review the gross and microscopic development of sites of embryologic fusion.  We examine histologic sections through fusion sites in normally developed adult and fetal fresh cadaver specimens.  Our studies, supported by our review of developmental anatomy, indicate that fusion planes do not persist as identifiable anatomic structures that would influence tumor spread.
Use of Mohs micrographic surgery to establish quantitative proof of heightened tumor spread in basal cell carcinoma recurrent following radiotherapy.  We compared 27 basal-cell carcinomas (BCCs) recurrent following radiotherapy and subsequently excised by Mohs micrographic surgery to a control group of BCCs recurrent following other treatment modalities and similarly excised.  Mohs technique permitted precise, quantitative tumor assessment, obtained via a novel method utilizing three parameters: the number of surgical stages required for complete excision, the percentage increase between clinical preoperative tumor area and final postoperative defect area, and the presence of deep subcutaneous tissue invasion.  Figures for the postradiation group were larger in all three categories, with the latter two revealing statistically significant differences versus the nonradiation group.  This study gives strong, direct quantitative support to the clinical impression that BCC recurrent following radiotherapy is a uniquely aggressive, invasive subset of recurrent BCC.
Growth factor-dependent differentiation along the myeloid and lymphoid lineages in an immature acute T lymphocytic leukemia.  Bone marrow cells from a child with an immature (CD2+, CD5+, CD7+) acute T lymphocytic leukemia (T-ALL) were cultured in the presence and absence of human rIL-2, IL-3, or granulocyte-macrophage (GM)-CSF.  Cells cultured without growth factors failed to divide and those initiated in the presence of IL-2 or GM-CSF underwent maturation and terminal T lymphoid or myelomonocytic differentiation, respectively.  In contrast, a permanent growth factor-dependent cell line, designated TALL-103/3, was established upon culture in IL-3.  The TALL-103/3 cells gradually lost the T cell-specific markers and acquired a myeloid phenotype (CD15+, CD33+).  Switching of the IL-3-dependent cells at an early passage to medium containing only human rIL-2 resulted in the establishment of a subline, named TALL-103/2, with a T lymphoid phenotype (CD3+, CD8+, TCR-gamma delta +, CD7+).  The TALL-103/2 cells strictly require IL-2 for growth, are irreversibly committed to the lymphoid lineage, and cannot survive in the presence of any other hemopoietic growth factor tested so far.  In contrast, the IL-3-dependent TALL-103/3 cells could be adapted to grow in synthetic (serum-free) medium also in the presence of either GM-CSF or IL-5, in which they retain a myeloid phenotype.  Interestingly, after 18 mo in culture in IL-3, the TALL-103/3 cells can still be phenotypically converted to the lymphoid lineage upon addition of IL-2, thus maintaining its bipotentiality.  Despite the marked phenotypic differences, the TALL-103/2 and TALL-103/3 cell lines show the same karyotypes with multiple abnormalities present in the primary malignant clone and have identical rearrangements of the TCR-gamma and -delta loci, thus confirming their derivation from a common precursor cell.  Together, these findings indicate that the phenotype of immature T-ALL cells can be drastically modified by the presence of specific hemopoietic growth factors in the environment, leading to either lymphoid or myeloid lineage commitment while leaving their karyotype and genotype intact.
Antigen-induced cross-linking of the IgE receptor leads to an association with the detergent-insoluble membrane skeleton of rat basophilic leukemia (RBL-2H3) cells.  Cross-linking of the IgE receptor on the surface of rat basophilic leukemia cells by multivalent Ag (DNP-BSA) causes a rapid conversion to a detergent-insoluble form.  There is a concurrent increase in the amount of filamentous actin associated with the plasma membrane.  Both the degree of receptor detergent insolubility and the rise in F-actin content are rapid with a half-maximal response of less than 1 min and can be rapidly reversed by the addition of monovalent Ag (DNP-lysine).  These two early steps in the triggering of rat basophilic leukemia cells can be dissociated from each other by pretreatment of the cells with either cytochalasin or sodium azide.  These reagents block the increase in F-actin but have no effect on receptor detergent insolubility.  This indicates that microfilaments are not responsible for detergent insolubility of the receptor and that it may be the membrane skeleton that is interacting with the complex.  This was further confirmed by the finding that cross-linking of the IgE receptors on the surface of purified plasma membranes also leads to detergent insolubility of the receptor.  Therefore, all of the components necessary for detergent insolubility of the receptor are present in the plasma membrane, and cytoplasmic components are not needed.  These results suggest that detergent insolubility and immobility of the cross-linked receptors are caused by multivalent interaction with the membrane skeleton.  Actin filaments may then interact with these receptor-membrane skeletal complexes in order to produce large scale clustering and capping.  The membrane skeleton may therefore be acting as an intermediate structure between the cell-surface receptors and microfilaments.
Mapping the site of interaction between murine IgE and its high affinity receptor with chimeric Ig.  We have investigated the interaction of mouse (m) IgE with its Fc epsilon RI on rat basophilic leukemia cells using a set of chimeric Ig that were constructed by exchanging homologous H chain C domains between human (hu) IgG1 and mIgE.  Binding affinities were examined with equilibrium and kinetic measurements, and we found that epsilon/C gamma 3 (mIgE with C epsilon 4 replaced by C gamma 3) was indistinguishable from mIgE.  The huIgG1 and the other chimeric Ig, which did not contain both C epsilon 2 and C epsilon 3, did not bind detectably to rat basophilic leukemia cells (Ka less than 10(6) M-1).  The ability of these chimeric Ig to stimulate a cellular response (degranulation) in the presence of multivalent Ag was also tested.  The epsilon/C gamma 3 was indistinguishable from mIgE in eliciting a high level of degranulation, whereas the other chimeric Ig stimulated no response even when they were preaggregated to enhance their binding avidity.  These results demonstrate that C epsilon 4 may be replaced by C gamma 3 without affecting the binding and cell activating properties of mIgE.  The lack of binding by the other chimeric Ig indicates that both C epsilon 2 and C epsilon 3 are necessary for the binding interaction.
IgE receptor-mediated phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis and exocytosis from rat basophilic leukemia cells are independent of extracellular Ca2+ in a hypotonic buffer containing a high concentration of K+.  In isotonic buffer, IgE receptor-mediated exocytosis from rat basophilic leukemia cells is dependent on extracellular Ca2+, with half-maximal degranulation requiring 0.4 mM Ca2+.  No significant exocytosis occurs in the absence of extracellular Ca2+.  This absolute requirement for Ca2+ is eliminated by suspending the cells in a hypotonic buffer containing 60 to 80 mM K+; Na+ cannot substitute for K+.  Optimal Ca2(+)-independent exocytosis occurs in a buffer containing 20 mM dipotassium Pipes, pH 7.1, 40 mM KCl, 5 mM glucose, 7 mM Mg acetate, 0.1% BSA, and 1 mM EGTA.  The cells maintain this Ca2(+)-independent exocytosis even if they are preincubated with 1 mM EGTA for 40 min at 37 degrees C before triggering.  Exocytosis is eliminated as isotonicity is approached by adding sucrose, NaCl, KCl, or potassium glutamate to the buffer.  Quin 2 fluorescence measurements reveal only a very small rise in [Ca2+]i when the cells are triggered in hypotonic buffer in the absence of extracellular Ca2+ and the presence of 1 mM EGTA.  In isotonic buffer, degranulation does not occur under conditions that lead to such a small rise in [Ca2+]i.  Sustained IgE receptor-mediated phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis, which is also Ca2+ dependent in isotonic buffer, becomes independent of Ca2+ in the hypotonic buffer.  In fact, the rate of phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis in hypotonic buffer in the absence of Ca2+ (and presence of 1 mM EGTA) is twice that observed in isotonic buffer in the presence of 1 mM Ca2+.  These data show that in hypotonic buffer, the requirement of IgE receptor-mediated PI hydrolysis for extracellular Ca2+ is eliminated, and degranulation proceeds with a [Ca2+]i of 0.1 microM, the baseline level of [Ca2+]i found in resting cells.  These results are consistent with the hypothesis that, in isotonic buffer, the Ca2+ requirement for mast cell degranulation is for the generation of second messengers via hydrolysis of membrane phosphatidylinositols.
Technetium-99m(v) dimercaptosuccinic acid planar scintigraphy in head and neck cancer: clinical, scintigraphic and radiological study.  Technetium-99m (Tc99m)(v) Dimercaptosuccinic Acid (DMSA) is an imaging agent which has been proposed as a scintigraphic marker for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.  Fifty-four patients were studied of whom 51 had a head and neck tumour.  All patients were examined and then imaged using Tc99m(v) DMSA scintigraphy and computerized tomography.  Scintigraphy was less sensitive than clinical examination in the detection of patients with cancer, patients with primary tumours and patients with metastatic neck disease.  CT was as sensitive and as accurate as clinical examination but more sensitive than Tc99m(v) DMSA in detecting patients with cancer and with primary tumours.  CT was more sensitive and more accurate than both clinical examination and Tc99m(v) DMSA scintigraphy in predicting which patients had metastatic neck disease.  Although Tc99m(v) DMSA is accumulated by squamous cell carcinoma, its inability to detect low volume disease and apparent low specificity means it has no role to play in the management of patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Late development of a squamous carcinoma in a reconstructed pharynx.  We report a case in which a squamous cell carcinoma was found to have arisen from a delto-pectoral skin flap used in pharyngeal reconstruction.  The flap had been forming a neo-pharynx for 24 years.  No other signs of recurrent disease had developed in this period.  This raises the possibility of tumour induction in heterotopic skin used for oropharyngeal reconstruction.
Haemangiosarcoma of the maxillary antrum.  Angiosarcomas are extremely rare in the head and neck and the histological diagnosis is often difficult.  We present a case of a haemangiosarcoma of the maxillary antrum in a 33 year old male.  The histological diagnosis and subsequent management are discussed.
Laser therapy for vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia after hysterectomy.  In recent years there has been a marked increase in the number of reported cases of vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN) after hysterectomy.  Until about 10 years ago radiation or surgery had been the therapeutic modality mostly used for this disease.  More recently, topical drugs, such as bleomycin and 5-fluorouracil cream, have been used, but they are often ineffective and poorly tolerated.  For the last 14 years we have used the CO2 laser for the treatment of VAIN and have treated a total of 143 patients.  Our use of a combination of wire sutures through the vaginal mucosa and the introduction of fluids into the underlying submucosal areas allows retraction and ballooning of the recesses and scars and permits us to place the vaginal mucosa at right angles to the laser beam to allow complete treatment.
The cytobrush for evaluating routine cervicovaginal-endocervical smears.  While the conventional wooden spatula/cotton-tipped applicator has remained the method of obtaining Papanicolaou smears for most clinicians at the University of California at Los Angeles, the Student Health Service (SHS) adopted the Zelsmyr cytobrush as its sole method of obtaining cervical samples in late 1986.  A study was done to define changes in both the adequacy of sampling and the detection rate for both squamous and glandular epithelial abnormalities with the cytobrush.  To accomplish this goal, 1,000 cytobrush and 244 conventionally obtained smears were analyzed prospectively, and 3,864 SHS samples obtained in 1986 prior to the change in method were reviewed retrospectively.  As compared to cervical samples obtained by conventional methods, the cytobrush smears contained significantly more endocervical cells and had fewer drying artifacts.  Both methods obtained equivalent squamous samples and had similar final class distributions.  No case of endocervical adenocarcinoma carcinoma in situ or invasive adenocarcinoma was detected.  SHS patients who had initial "no endocervical cells" samples but whose repeat sample did contain endocervical cells retained the same class in more than 75% of cases.  This study confirmed that the cytobrush technique produces Papanicolaou smears with improved sampling of the squamocolumnar junction but questioned whether that results in an increased detection rate for cervical pathology.
Human recombinant GM-CSF in allogeneic bone-marrow transplantation for leukaemia: double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.  In a randomised, double-blind trial 20 patients with leukaemia received human recombinant granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and 20 received placebo, for 14 days after allogeneic, matched sibling, bone-marrow transplantation.  The neutrophil count recovered to 0.5 x 10(9)/l 3 days earlier in the GM-CSF group than in the placebo group (not significant), and the median neutrophil count at 14 days was significantly higher in the GM-CSF group (1.90 vs 0.46 x 10(9)/l).  The lymphocyte count was significantly higher in the GM-CSF than in the placebo group between days 10 and 15 after transplantation, but this difference was not associated with a higher incidence of graft-versus-host disease.  There was no evidence that GM-CSF was associated with a greater incidence of leukaemic relapse.  The GM-CSF group had lower haemoglobin concentrations and platelet counts and higher plasma urea, creatinine, and bilirubin than the placebo group.  The duration of hospital stay was the same for both patient groups.  Further studies are now indicated to assess the overall effect of GM-CSF on outcome after allogeneic bone-marrow transplantation.
Synthetic analogues of fumagillin that inhibit angiogenesis and suppress tumour growth.  Neovascularization is critical for the growth of tumours and is a dominant feature in a variety of angiogenic diseases such as diabetic retinopathy, haemangiomas, arthritis and psoriasis.  Recognition of the potential therapeutic benefit of controlling unabated capillary growth has led to a search for safe and effective angiogenesis inhibitors.  We report here the synthesis of a family of novel inhibitors that are analogues of fumagillin, a naturally secreted antibiotic of Aspergillus fumigatus fresenius.  We first isolated this fungus from a contaminated culture of capillary endothelial cells.  Purified fumagillin inhibited endothelial cell proliferation in vitro and tumour-induced angiogenesis in vivo; it also inhibited tumour growth in mice, but prolonged administration was limited because it caused severe weight loss.  Synthesis of fumagillin analogues yielded potent angiogenesis inhibitors ('angioinhibins') which suppress the growth of a wide variety of tumours with relatively few side-effects.
Purification and characterization of an inhibitor (soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor) for tumor necrosis factor and lymphotoxin obtained from the serum ultrafiltrates of human cancer patients.  Serum ultrafiltrates (SUF) from human patients with different types of cancer contain a blocking factor (BF) that inhibits the cytolytic activity of human tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) in vitro.  BF is a protein with a molecular mass of 28 kDa on reducing sodium dodecyl sulfate/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS/PAGE).  The active material was purified to homogeneity by a combination of affinity chromatography, PAGE, and high-pressure liquid chromatography.  Amino acid sequence analysis revealed that BF is derived from the membrane TNF receptor.  Purified BF blocks the lytic activity of recombinant human and mouse TNF-alpha and recombinant human lymphotoxin on murine L929 cells in vitro.  However, BF inhibits the lytic activity of TNF-alpha more effectively than it does that of lymphotoxin.  The BF also inhibits the necrotizing activity of recombinant human TNF-alpha when coinjected into established cutaneous Meth A tumors in BALB/c mice.  The BF may have an important role in (i) the regulation and control of TNF-alpha and lymphotoxin activity in cancer patients, (ii) interaction between the tumor and the host antitumor mechanisms, and (iii) use of systemically administered TNF-alpha in clinical trials with human cancer patients.
Cholangiocarcinoma.  The diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma can now be made with greater rapidity and accuracy.  In the clinical setting of obstructive jaundice, a CT scan or sonogram may suggest cholangiocarcinoma if dilated intrahepatic ducts are seen with a nondilated extrahepatic biliary tree.  The diagnosis is confirmed by cholangiography, and the tumor is staged by the combination of cholangiography and angiography.  If the tumor extensively involves both lobes of the liver or involves the main portal vein or hepatic artery, the lesion is considered unresectable.  These patients are best palliated nonoperatively, but they should still have an attempt at a tissue diagnosis, as various other lesions can masquerade as cholangiocarcinoma.  In comparison, if the tumor is confined to or is distal to the hepatic duct bifurcation, extends into only one lobe of the liver, or involves only the right or the left portal vein or hepatic artery, the lesion may be resectable, and exploration is indicated.  As many as half of all patients explored with curative intent will have a successful resection.  Various surgical options are appropriate for patients undergoing tumor resection, depending on the site and extent of the lesion.  Similarly, several surgical options are possible for palliation in patients with unresectable cholangiocarcinoma.  The role of radiotherapy in the management of cholangiocarcinoma is uncertain.  Our results, like those of many other retrospective analyses, suggest that radiotherapy prolongs survival after curative resection as well as after palliative stenting.  However, further data from randomized studies are necessary to support or refute this impression.  Further studies of adjuvant chemotherapy or hormonal therapy will also be necessary to improve patient survival.
Effects of tamoxifen and somatostatin analogue on growth of human medullary, follicular, and papillary thyroid carcinoma cell lines: tissue culture and nude mouse xenograft studies.  The knowledge that (1) the normal thyroid contains somatostatin, (2) polypeptide growth factors influence thyroid cell function, and (3) thyroid cells contain steroid hormone receptors prompted us to add somatostatin analogue No.  201-995 (SMS) (5 ng/ml) and/or tamoxifen citrate (TAM) (5 mumol/L) to 7-day monolayer cultures (50,000 cells/well) of three separate human thyroid carcinoma cell lines: DR081 (medullary), WR082 (follicular), and NPA'87 (papillary).  Results, tabulated as cell numbers/well (X10(5) on day 7, revealed that TAM inhibited growth of medullary and follicular cells and that TAM plus SMS inhibited growth of papillary cells.  In vivo studies of subcutaneous tumor cell xenografts in nude mice have documented that TAM (5 mg subcutaneous pellet) significantly inhibits the growth of medullary implants.  Flow cytometric DNA studies of medullary cell cultures demonstrated a reduced G2 + M phase with TAM treatment.  For papillary cell implants, TAM plus SMS (5 micrograms subcutaneously, twice daily) did not suppress tumor growth.  All three cell lines were negative for estrogen receptor; addition of estradiol (5 ng/ml) to medullary cell cultures neither stimulated replication nor reversed the inhibitory effects of TAM in vitro.  We conclude that (1) TAM slowed the growth of a cell line of human medullary carcinoma, both in vitro and in vivo; (2) this effect was not reversed by estradiol; (3) TAM plus SMS inhibited replication of a papillary carcinoma cell line in vitro, but not in vivo; and (4) TAM alone and TAM plus SMS inhibited replication of cultures of a human follicular thyroid carcinoma cell line.  TAM and SMS may be useful in treatment of some human thyroid carcinomas.
Time to recovery of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis after curative resection of adrenal tumors in patients with Cushing's syndrome.  The recovery time of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis after curative resection of adrenal tumors in patients with Cushing's syndrome is poorly documented.  Eight consecutive patients were treated with a standardized hydrocortisone replacement strategy after curative resection of a cortisol-secreting tumor and the time to recovery of the HPA axis was determined.  Hypercortisolism was documented by elevated 24-hour urinary free cortisol levels.  Cure was documented by undetectable postoperative morning serum cortisol levels.  Each patient received replacement hydrocortisone after surgery and was reevaluated every 3 to 6 months with an adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test.  Each patient was also monitored carefully for symptoms and signs of adrenal insufficiency, which was defined as symptoms consistent with this diagnosis that responded to increases in hydrocortisone levels.  After surgical resection, each patient was cured of hypercortisolism.  Subsequently, despite replacement hydrocortisone, each patient had symptoms of hypocortisolism, and in four of eight patients the dose of hydrocortisone was increased to relieve the symptoms.  Patients required a median time of 15 months (range, 9 to 22 months) to recover a normal ACTH stimulation test and 19 months (range, 12 to 24 months) to allow discontinuation of replacement doses of hydrocortisone.  The results suggest that surgical resection of a cortisol-secreting adrenal tumor will result in rapid cure of hypercortisolism, but complete recovery of the HPA axis and discontinuation of replacement steroids will require between 1 and 2 years.  Normal adrenal function, as assessed by the cortisol response to ACTH, returns despite replacement doses of hydrocortisone, and replacement doses of hydrocortisone can be tapered rapidly or discontinued after a normal ACTH stimulation test.
Posttranslational gastrin processing depends on tumor morphology.  Extracellular matrices have recently been demonstrated to alter cell morphology in culture.  Altered cell morphology has been associated with changes in gene transcription and translation, but it is not known whether it also affects posttranslational processing.  Using tyrosine-O-sulfation as a marker of processing, we studied the effects of various substrates on biologically active gastrin (IRG) production and sulfation in gastrin-containing tumor cells (GT cells).  Dispersed GT cells were plated onto different substrates and then incubated.  Culture media from days 4, 7, and 28 were assayed with specific antibodies that recognize total IRG and nonsulfated IRG.  Cells cultured on plastic and dried films of laminin, collagen, and Matrigel (Collaborative Research Inc., Lexington, Mass.) flattened and formed monolayers of GT cells.  Cells cultured on a porous membrane and hydrated gels of collagen and Matrigel did not flatten but formed spheroids of GT cells.  The monolayer cultures showed an increase in sulfation with time but a decrease in IRG production.  The spheroid cultures maintained a constant level of sulfation over time and, with the exception of Matrigel (gel), also showed a decrease in IRG production.  These results indicate that the level of sulfation was unchanged from that of the original tumor when cells were grown in spheroids but increased when cultured as monolayers.  It appears that alteration of the cellular milieu alters colony morphology, which in turn alters gastrin processing.
Extraadrenal retroperitoneal paragangliomas: natural history and response to treatment.  Extraadrenal retroperitoneal paragangliomas (RP) are uncommon tumors.  Because of their rarity, little is known of their natural history or response to treatment.  We reviewed 22 patients with RP who were seen at our center between 1949 and 1990.  The distribution of male and female patients was nearly equal, and the mean age was 42.  Most patients were admitted with pain or a mass, and eight of 22 tumors were functional.  No significant difference was noted in duration of symptoms, size of the tumor, or survival between functional and nonfunctional tumors.  Eleven of 22 (50%) RP metastasized and were therefore classified as malignant.  Five-year and 10-year disease free survival rates were 19% and 19% for tumors not resected and 75% and 45% for those completely resected.  Once metastases occurred, the 5-year survival rate was 36%, but no patient survived beyond 76 months.  Predictors of survival included complete resection of the tumor but not size or functional status.  Although some patients who received chemotherapy or radiotherapy had clinical responses, a survival benefit could not be shown.  RP have a high rate of malignant behavior and should be treated aggressively with operation.  Late metastases are not uncommon, and prolonged follow-up is necessary.  Once metastases have occurred, some patients may have prolonged survival.
The effect of somatostatin on 5-hydroxytryptamine release from a carcinoid tumor.  One of the major manifestations of the carcinoid syndrome is secretory diarrhea thought to be due to overproduction of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT).  Synthetic somatostatin analogues have proved to be clinically effective in controlling this diarrhea.  We have established a continuous cell line from a human pancreatic carcinoid tumor that secretes 5-HT.  We examined the ability of the somatostatin analogue, SMS 201-995, to inhibit 5-HT release in vitro.  Tumor cells were exposed to SMS 201-995 (10(-6) mol/L), pentagastrin (10(-9) mol/L), acetylcholine (10(-5) mol/L), and isoproterenol (10(-5) mol/L) alone and in combination; 5-HT release was assayed with high pressure liquid chromatography.  We found that pentagastrin (6.43 +/- 0.64 ng/ml), isoproterenol (20.24 +/- 2.17 ng/ml), and acetylcholine (12.39 +/- 1.10 ng/ml) each stimulated release of 5-HT compared to control values (4.38 +/- 0.42 ng/ml).  SMS 201-995 significantly reduced release of 5-HT in response to isoproterenol and acetylcholine but did not inhibit the effect of pentagastin.  These data suggest that different agents do not act through the same pathway to stimulate 5-HT release from human pancreatic carcinoid cells.
Intraatrial extension of thyroid cancer: technique and results of a radical surgical approach.  An occlusion of the superior vena cava by a tumor thrombus extending into the right atrium was diagnosed in three patients with a follicular thyroid cancer.  All patients showed the typical clinical picture of the superior vena cava syndrome.  A right parasternal thoracotomy was performed for preparation of the major vessels.  The superior vena cava was opened and the entire intravascular tumor thrombus was removed.  The cavotomy was closed directly in two patients.  In the third patient the left brachiocephalic trunk was resected and reconstructed with a vascular (polytetrafluoroethylene) graft.  This patient had bone and brain metastases and an occlusion of the graft 3 months after surgery after anticoagulation was stopped.  The other two patients were clinically symptom free without local recurrence 13 and 50 months after surgery.  An aggressive surgical approach is justified in grossly invasive thyroid cancer to decrease local recurrence and death rates, to correct the disturbing clinical symptoms of superior vena caval occlusion, and to prevent tumor embolism and the development of distant metastases.  By reducing tumor mass, an even better basis for radioiodine treatment can be prepared.
Intraoperative decision making during thyroid surgery based on the results of preoperative needle biopsy and frozen section.  Prognostic factors in well-differentiated thyroid cancer are age of the patient and grade, size, distant metastasis, and extracapsular spread of the disease.  However, the surgeon is often not sure about the pathologic diagnosis of thyroid nodules.  The accuracy of preoperative studies, such as ultrasonography and thyroid scanning, is limited.  The most cost-effective test is fine-needle aspiration, the accuracy of which exceeds 80% in most series.  However, a large group of nodules exist for which aspiration cytologic studies are considered to be either suspicious or indeterminate.  The decision about the extent of thyroidectomy may be difficult in these patients.  Intraoperative frozen section may help the surgeon to distinguish benign from malignant lesions, but as in fine-needle aspiration, the major problem is the distinction between follicular adenoma and follicular carcinoma.  The frozen section diagnosis of follicular adenoma was changed to follicular carcinoma in one third of the cases (13 of 38 cases).  The decision about the extent of thyroidectomy in patients with follicular adenomas was based on other prognostic factors, such as age and sex of the patient and the size of the nodule.  The accuracy of frozen section diagnosis was 95%.  Our experience suggests that decisions regarding the extent of thyroidectomy can best be made by preoperative fine-needle aspiration with confirmation by frozen section diagnosis in equivocal cases.
Prognostic significance of nondiploid DNA determined by flow cytometry in sporadic and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma.  To clarify the role of DNA measurements in predicting outcome after surgical treatment of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), we performed flow cytometric analysis in nuclear suspensions of 119 MTC tumors.  Of the 119 patients, 63 (53%) patients had sporadic tumors and 56 (47%) patients had familial tumors; survivors were followed for a mean of 13 years.  DNA content was normal in 92 (77%) patients and abnormal (nondiploid) in 27 (23%) patients.  Ten-year cause-specific mortality rates were 12%, 42%, and 49% with diploid, tetraploid/polyploid, or aneuploid tumors (p = 0.0009) and were greater with nondiploid tumors both in the sporadic (p = 0.012) and multiple endocrine neoplasia (familial) cases (p = 0.114).  None of 27 patients with TNM stage I disease died of MTC.  In patients with TNM stages II, III, and IV disease, DNA nondiploid tumors were associated with increased deaths from MTC.  In a Cox proportional hazards model involving all 119 patients and adjusted for disease stage and inheritance pattern, nondiploid DNA was independently associated with increased deaths from MTC (p = 0.008).  In an identical Cox model restricted to the 92 DNA diploid tumors, an S-phase fraction of 15.0% or more remained a significant variable (p = 0.034) after adjustment for stage and inheritance pattern.  We therefore conclude that DNA measurements do have a role to play in predicting outcome after surgical treatment of MTC.
Actin architecture of cultured human thyroid cancer cells: predictor of differentiation?  The actin cytoskeleton is important for cell structure and motility.  A disordered actin architecture has been correlated with a high metastatic potential in melanoma, fibrosarcoma, and colon cancer models.  Thyrotropin is known to induce growth and differentiation in cultured thyroid cells, whereas the carcinogenic phorbol ester 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA) causes dedifferentiation and malignant transformation in many cell lines.  We therefore assessed the effect of thyrotropin and TPA on the actin architecture of FTC-133 human follicular thyroid cancer cells in continuous culture.  Staining of filamentous actin with rhodamine phalloidin showed that 1 mU/ml or 30 mU/ml thyrotropin-induced actin polymerization was detectable at 1 hour but more notable at 24 hours.  Similarly TPA (0.008 to 10 mumol/L) caused rapid actin fiber disruption and redistribution to the cell periphery.  Secondary antibody staining for alpha-actinin, a protein that binds and crosslinks actin, was more prominent after treatment with thyrotropin but decreased after TPA.  These findings indicate that the actin cytoskeleton has a dynamic response to trophic factors.  Thyrotropin promoted actin polymerization, but TPA caused depolymerization.  These effects may correlate with cellular alpha-actinin levels.  Actin architecture may therefore reflect the state of differentiation of thyroid tumor cells.
Posterior mediastinal teratoma with abdominal extension.  Posterior mediastinal benign teratomas are uncommon neoplasms in infancy; nine cases have been reported so far.  A one month old baby was found to have a benign posterior mediastinal teratoma infiltrating the lower oesophagus from the level of the carina through the oesophageal hiatus into the upper abdomen.  Partial oesophagectomy provided a successful outcome.
Parental age in sporadic hereditary retinoblastoma.  Of 104 children with sporadic hereditary retinoblastoma born between 1945 and 1970, we studied the age of their parents at the birth and compared this age with the mean age of parents at the birth of their children during the same period in The Netherlands.  The mean age of fathers at the birth of their children with sporadic hereditary retinoblastoma (33.7 years) was significantly higher than the mean age of fathers at the birth of their children in the general population (32.5 years) (P less than .05, one sided).  Similarly, the mean age of mothers at the birth of their children with sporadic hereditary retinoblastoma (31.2 years) was significantly higher than the mean age of mothers at the birth of their children in the general population (29.5 years) (P less than .05, one sided).  We further analyzed this parental age factor by measuring the relative risk of age groups and comparing the incidence of sporadic hereditary retinoblastoma in the various parental age groups with the incidence of sporadic hereditary retinoblastoma in the total population.  Mothers 35 years of age or older had a relative risk of 1.7 to have a child with sporadic hereditary retinoblastoma compared with mothers in the population in general (P = .006, one sided).  Similarly, fathers 50 years of age or older had a relative risk of 5.0 to have a child with sporadic hereditary retinoblastoma compared with fathers in the population in general (P = .04, one sided).  No parental age effect was found in children with nonhereditary retinoblastoma.  We conclude that a high paternal and a high maternal age are significant risk factors for sporadic hereditary retinoblastoma.
Carotid body tumors.  The surgical management of carotid body tumors requires identification and preservation of neural and vascular structures without compromising resection of the neoplasm.  Fifteen patients were examined and treated for carotid body tumors at the Cleveland (Ohio) Clinic Foundation from 1979 through 1987.  The benchmark of diagnosis is bilateral carotid angiography.  When neural structures are free of tumor, meticulous dissection facilitates their preservation.  Large tumor size increases risk for arterial resection necessitating reconstruction.  The use of a vascular shunt minimizes the risk of cerebral ischemia.  Postoperative intravenous digital subtraction angiography allows for evaluation of arterial repair.  A retrospective review of 15 carotid body tumor resections performed in 14 patients revealed no evidence of tumor recurrence, no mortality associated with surgical intervention, no postoperative cerebrovascular accident, and limited morbidity associated with unavoidable sacrifice of neural elements.
Oncogene amplification in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.  Cellular oncogenes appear to be involved in the control of normal cell growth and differentiation.  The abnormal activation of these genes in naturally occurring and experimentally induced cancers may have an important role in the expression of the malignant phenotype in cancer cells.  Mechanisms for the activation of these genes include chromosomal translocation, point mutation, and DNA amplification.  The amplification of specific oncogenes correlates with clinical prognosis in several human malignancies, including breast cancer and neuroblastoma.  We examined 21 fresh-frozen human squamous cell carcinomas of the aerodigestive tract for amplification of 10 known cellular oncogenes (c-myc, N-myc, L-myc, N-ras, H-ras, K-ras, erb-B, erb-B2, raf, and int-2), using Southern blotting techniques.  Eleven of 21 tumors demonstrated a two-fold to 11-fold amplification of the int-2 oncogene, one member of a family of genes related to basic fibroblast growth factor.  Amplification of c-myc, a gene that codes for a DNA-binding protein involved in the regulation of cell growth, was seen in two tumors.  None of the other eight genes studied were amplified in any of the tumor specimens.
Intraoperative radiation of canine carotid artery, internal jugular vein, and vagus nerve. Therapeutic applications in the management of advanced head and neck cancers.  As a step in the application of intraoperative radiotherapy (IORT) for treating advanced head and neck cancers, preliminary information was obtained on the radiation tolerance of the canine common carotid artery, internal jugular vein, and vagus nerve to a single, high-dose electron beam.  Both sides of the neck of eight mongrel dogs were operated on to expose an 8-cm segment of common carotid artery, internal jugular vein, and vagus nerve.  One side of the neck was irradiated, using escalating doses of 2500, 3500, 4500, and 5500 cGy.  The contralateral side of the neck served as the unirradiated control.  At 3 and 6 months after IORT, one dog at each dose level was killed.  None of the dogs developed carotid bleeding at any time after IORT.  Light microscopic investigations using hematoxylin-eosin staining on the common carotid artery and internal jugular vein showed no consistent changes that suggested radiation damage; however, the Masson trichrome stain and hydroxyproline concentration of irradiated common carotid artery indicated an increase in the collagen content of the tunica media.  Marked changes in the irradiated vagus nerve were seen, indicating severe demyelination and loss of nerve fibers, which appeared to be radiation-dose dependent.  Four patients with advanced recurrent head and neck cancer were treated with surgical resection and IORT without any acute or subacute complications.  The role of IORT as a supplement to surgery, external beam irradiation, and chemotherapy in selected patients with advanced head and neck cancer needs further exploration.
Use of the levator scapulae muscle flap in head and neck reconstruction.  There are numerous techniques available for reconstruction of defects following composite resection of oral cavity and oropharyngeal tumors.  No single technique is applicable in all situations.  The levator scapulae muscle flap is well known for its application in carotid protection.  Little attention is paid to its usefulness in other aspects of head and neck reconstruction.  We have been using the levator scapulae muscle flap for a variety of reconstructive problems.  The flap is useful for buttressing intraoral suture lines, closing intraoral defects, and providing soft tissue to fill in dead spaces and bulk out lateral and anterior oral defects.  The levator flap was found to be easy to elevate, safe, and reliable with a minimum of wound complications.  A review of 18 patients, representative case studies, and a discussion of surgical technique and relevant anatomy and blood supply is presented.
The Patterns of Care Outcome Study for cancer of the uterine cervix. Results of the Second National Practice Survey.  This report summarizes the outcome results of the Patterns of Care Study (PCS) of cancer of the uterine cervix from 565 patients treated in 1978.  The 5-year survival with no evidence of disease was: Stage I, 74%; Stage II, 56%; and Stage III, 33%.  The 5-year local in-field failure rate was: Stage I, 12%, Stage II, 27%; and Stage III, 51%.  Extent of parametrial involvement, unilateral versus bilateral, may be important in determining survival and local failure.  The four-year actuarial survival was 58% for unilateral involvement versus 47% for bilateral (P = 0.06), and the local failure rate was 32% for unilateral versus 45% for bilateral (P less than 0.05).  When analyzed by stage, patients with Stage IIb disease with unilateral parametrial involvement showed a trend toward improved survival and decreased local failure compared with those with bilateral Stage IIb cancers (P = 0.1).  The use of intracavitary irradiation significantly improved survival and reduced local failures.  Furthermore, the number of intracavitary applications was important.  When two or more intracavitary applications were used compared with one application, local in-field failure was significantly reduced, 29% versus 17% at 4 years (P less than 0.001), and four-year survival was improved, 60% versus 73% (P = 0.01).  The four-year actuarial rate of major complications depended on the stage: Stage I, 8%; Stage II, 15%; and Stage III, 13%.  There was a statistically significant increase in major complications in patients undergoing laparotomy for staging versus no laparotomy 23% versus 11% at 4 years (P less than or equal to 0.01) and a trend toward increased major complications in patients who were thin or had prior abdominal surgery.  This study confirmed the stage-dependent outcome of treatment of cancer of the uterine cervix with radiation and indicated that further division of Stage IIb to indicate prognostic significance of unilateral or bilateral parametrial involvement may be warranted.  This study also confirmed the importance of intracavitary radiation in optimizing control established by the 1973 PCS.  It further suggests that where possible, two intracavitary insertions may yield better results than one insertion.
Carboplatin in childhood brain tumors. A Children's Cancer Study Group Phase II trial.  Between October 1985 and March 1988, Children's Cancer Study Group institutions entered 95 patients with recurrent brain tumors into a Phase II trial of carboplatin 560 mg/m2 every 4 weeks.  Complete or partial responses were observed for one of 19 evaluable children with brainstem glioma, two of 14 with ependymoma, six of 19 with medulloblastoma or central nervous system primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET), and none of 15 with high-grade astrocytoma.  Of 33 children with medulloblastoma, ependymoma, or central nervous system PNET, five of 12 with no prior cisplatin exposure had responses, and two of 21 with prior cisplatin exposure had responses (P = 0.03).  Thirty-four percent of patients had absolute neutrophil count nadirs less than 500/microliters, and 37% had platelet count nadirs less than 25,000/microliters.  Sixteen percent had moderate to severe otoxicity, 10% had nausea and vomiting, and none had nephrotoxicity.
Interferon alpha-2a and 5-fluorouracil for advanced colorectal carcinoma. Assessment of activity and toxicity.  Preclinical data showed that the cytotoxic effects of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) are augmented by interferon (IFN).  In a small study, 13 of 17 patients with advanced colorectal cancer responded to a regimen of 5-FU with IFN.  Using the same dose and schedule as in this pilot study, 38 previously untreated patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma were treated with continuous intravenous (IV) infusion of 5-FU 750 mg/m2 daily for 5 days, followed by weekly bolus 5-FU at 750 mg/m2 and subcutaneous IFN at 9 million units three times per week.  Of 35 evaluable patients, nine (26%) had a partial response (95% confidence limit, 11% to 41%), with a median response duration of 7.5 months (range, 4.4 to greater than 11.7 months).  Seven patients (20%) had a minor response, and ten (28%) had stable disease.  The most common toxicities observed were stomatitis (52%) and diarrhea (43%).  Neurotoxicity was seen in 34% of patients and consisted of gait disturbance, dizziness, confusion, memory loss, and dementia.  Because of toxicity, 84% of patients required a reduction of the IFN dose by at least 50%, and 63% required reduction of the 5-FU dose by at least 25%.  Although the combination of 5-FU and IFN in patients with advanced colorectal carcinoma has some activity, the regimen was toxic, and the observed response rate (26%) was not substantially superior to alternative 5-FU programs.
Conservative surgery and radiation therapy for soft tissue sarcoma of the wrist, hand, ankle, and foot.  Seventy-eight patients with soft tissue sarcoma (STS) arising in the distal extremities--wrist, hand, finger, ankle, foot, and toe--who were treated with conservation surgery and radiation therapy were studied retrospectively with respect to survival, local recurrence, functional limb preservation, complications, and distant metastasis.  After a median follow-up of 7.9 years, actuarial 5-year and 10-year survival rates were 80% and 69%, respectively, and disease-free rates were 61% and 51% at the same times.  Actuarial local control rates were 80% and 74% at 5 and 10 years, respectively.  Fifteen patients (19%) had local recurrence, but 12 of these were salvaged.  Ultimately, 53 patients (68%) retained a normal or fairly normal extremity, six (8%) needed amputation for complications, and 13 (17%) needed amputation to control recurrent disease.  The functional outcome was significantly better for patients with upper extremity lesions than for those with lower extremity tumors; even for the latter, this treatment strategy was preferable to amputation.  The incidence of hematogenous metastases from distal extremity sarcomas depends on the size of the primary tumor.  It was concluded that conservation surgery and radiation therapy (XRT) is an acceptable treatment strategy for STS arising in distal extremities; it yielded a high rate of disease control and functional limb preservation.
A standard dose of radiation for "microscopic disease" is not appropriate.  Elective irradiation of sites of potential occult tumor spread is often part of a patient's radiation therapy program.  The required radiation dose (D) depends on the probability that occult disease exists (P(occ)), the number of sites at risk (A), the number of tumor clonogens present (Ni), their radiation sensitivity, and the desired control rate.  An exponential model of cell survival is used to quantify the importance of these factors.  Control Probability = [1 - Pocc x (1 - e-Ni x (SF2)D/2)]A; SF2 = surviving fraction after 2 Gy.  Implications for clinical radiation therapy include: 1.  Since the number of clonogens in an occult site may vary from 10 degrees to 10(8), Ni is the major determinant of the required dose.  The intrinsic radiation sensitivity of the clonogens (SF2) is also extremely important in determining the dose.  Other factors are less influential since they vary less.  2.  The variability of Ni (8 logs) is larger than the variation in cell number seen with gross disease (1 cm3 versus 1000 cm3, 3 logs).  When Ni approximately 10(8), the required dose approaches that needed for small volume gross disease (10(9) cells, 1 cm3).  3.  The dose prescribed to elective sites should reflect the risk of occult disease based on the primary tumor site, stage, and grade.  4.  Regions where clinicoradiologic evaluation is difficult (e.g., pelvis and obese neck) require higher doses because macroscopic tumor deposits may exist.  5.  Relatively low doses (10 to 30 Gy) are often thought to be inadequate for microscopic tumor.  However, similar doses have been reported to sterilize microscopic tumor in ovarian, rectal, bladder, breast, and head and neck carcinomas.  Relatively low doses should not be discounted since they may be useful in select cases when normal tissue tolerances and/or previous irradiation treatment limit the radiation dose.
The interplay of local and distant control in the cure of cervical cancer.  From 1978 to 1986, 183 women with cervical cancer received definitive radiation therapy after extraperitoneal surgical staging.  Relapse-free rates were strong functions of pelvic lymph node metastases and cervical size.  The recurrence distribution consisted of 4% isolated local, 13% isolated distant, and 17% combined local and distant failures.  With the assumption of independent local and distant failure probabilities, Suit et al.'s method was extended to assess potential improvement in cure attainable with perfect local and distant control, yielding local (LSA) and distant (DSA) survival advantages of 17% and 28%.  Various subsets of clinical stage, cervical size, pelvic node metastases, periaortic metastases, and peritoneal metastases had LSA from 12% to 27% and DSA from 12% to 71%.  For any prognostic group, LSA never exceeded DSA, showing that effective systemic therapy would have a greater impact on improving survival than would advances in local and regional tumor control.  Therapeutic implications and limitations of the extended LSA-DSA model are discussed.  This form of analysis can be used to guide the intensity of local and distant treatment to maximize the cure of the patient with cancer.
The role of elective lymph node dissection in the management of patients with thick cutaneous melanoma.  A retrospective search of patients seen at the Duke Melanoma Clinic from 1970 to 1986 identified 308 clinically Stage I patients, with 4.0 to 10.0 mm cutaneous melanomas.  Five-year and ten-year survival was 56% and 43%, respectively.  Elective lymph node dissection (ELND) was done in 116 patients (37.7%); there was no difference in disease-free interval (DFI) or survival between these patients versus patients treated with wide excision only (P = 0.9).  Thirty-two patients (27.6%) had pathologically positive nodes on ELND.  These patients had a shorter DFI (P = 0.05) and survival (P = 0.03) compared with patients with negative node dissections.  When further divided by Breslow's thickness, this difference persisted in patients with 4.0 to 6.0 mm lesions (P = 0.01).  However, for thicker lesions (greater than 6.0 mm), there was no difference in survival between the node-negative and node-positive groups (P = 0.9).  The mean follow-up was 7.1 years.  Elective lymph node dissection was not done in 192 patients; 78 of these recurred first in the regional nodes.  These 78 patients were compared with the 32 patients who had pathologically positive nodes by ELND to see if patient survival was improved by early removal of nodal disease.  There was no difference in DFI (P = 0.5) or survival (P = 0.3) between these two groups.  It is concluded that ELND may provide prognostic information for patients with thick cutaneous melanomas.  However, there was no change in DFI or ultimate survival when patients were followed, and nodes removed when clinically positive.  The authors do not recommend ELND for patients with thick melanomas because the risk of distant metastases outweighs any benefit of regional node dissection.
Endoscopic and radiographic evaluation of the murine colon.  Endoscopic and radiographic techniques have not been widely applicable in the evaluation of chemically induced murine colon cancer.  The authors investigated methods of cleansing the rat colon and refined endoscopic and radiographic techniques.  They compared total colonoscopy (TC) and air-contrast (ACBE) and single-contrast barium enema (SCBE) findings with those obtained at necropsy in rats with 1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH)-induced colon cancer.  Gastrograffin enemas with bisacodyl suppositiories showed complete evacuation of solid feces.  Sprague-Dawley rats treated with DMH had their colons cleansed and then underwent TC (5.0-mm Olympus bronchoscope) and either SCBE or ACBE.  Colonoscopy and ACBE were equally sensitive (81.5% and 76.3%, respectively), although SCBE was significantly insensitive in identifying lesions (P less than 0.001).  This study demonstrates that: (1) mechanical cleansing of the rat colon is feasible, (2) TC and barium radiology can be done routinely after mechanical cleansing, and (3) TC and double-contrast BE are sensitive in identifying colon lesions.  These techniques will provide a means for manipulation of murine tumors and in vivo surveillance.
Immunohistochemical differentiation of basal cell epithelioma from cutaneous appendages using monoclonal anti-glycoprotein antibody TNKH1. Its application in Mohs' micrographic surgery.  TNKH1, which was primarily developed to detect differentiated melanocytic tumor cells, was found to recognize basal keratinocytes of hair follicle and some basal keratinocytes of human epidermis.  Thus, TNKH1 decorated the basal cells of following structures: epidermis (39 of 54, only part of each specimen [OPES]), upper hair follicle (one of 24, OPES), lower hair follicle (21 of 21, very high rate of each specimen [VHES]), sebaceous duct (14 of 15, VHES), sebaceous gland (ten of 14, germinative cells near duct), eccrine duct (three of 19, OPES).  Epithelial tumors, considered to be derived from or differentiating toward hair follicle such as trichilemmoma (one of one, VHES) and basal cell epithelioma (BCE) (32 of 32, VHES) were labeled not only in the peripheral cells but in their entirety.  On the other hand, epidermal tumors, such as seborrheic keratosis (ten of 11, OPES), actinic keratosis (two of three, OPES), and squamous cell carcinoma (one of two, OPES), showed an irregular peripheral basal cell staining as in normal epidermis.  The apocrine sweat apparatus and eccrine secretory portion were negative.  Eccrine ductal tumors such as syringoma (two tested), eccrine acrospiroma (one), and eccrine carcinoma (two) were TNKH1 negative.  Taking advantage of this total labeling of BCE versus peripheral labeling of the hair follicle, the authors could distinguish BCE tissue from other structures clearly.  Among confusing structures the upper hair follicle and the eccrine duct were excluded easily because of their negative staining with TNKH1.  The lower hair follicle was TNKH1 positive but only in the outer basal layer, whereas the BCE was TNKH1 positive in its entire basaloid cells.  The result indicated that TNKH1 will be a useful antibody in Mohs' micrographic surgery.
Immunohistochemical demonstration of the placental form of glutathione S-transferase, a detoxifying enzyme in human gliomas.  Expression of the human placental form of glutathion S-transferase (GST-pi) in human gliomas was investigated by immunohistochemical methods, and the result was compared with that of normal human glial cells.  The gliomas in this study were composed of five benign astrocytomas (Grade 2), ten anaplastic astrocytomas (Grade 3), and 16 glioblastomas (Grade 4).  Normal human glial cells showed only a weak immunostaining response for GST-pi in the cytoplasm or some nuclear membranes.  All of benign astrocytomas had diffusely weak GST-pi immunostaining, resembling that of normal glial cells.  With increasing grade, gliomas showed a strongly positive reaction for GST-pi.  The positive reactions were remarkable especially in the gemistocytes and giant cells in the high-grade gliomas.  These results suggest that cells of gliomas have some detoxifying function and the expression of this detoxifying enzyme, GST-pi, is related to the degree of malignancy of the gliomas.
Expression of placental alkaline phosphatase in gastric and colorectal cancers. An immunohistochemical study using the prepared monoclonal antibody.  The authors developed monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) against human placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP).  Four specific MoAb reacting only with PLAP and two nonspecific MoAb reacting equally with isozymes of alkaline phosphatase (hepatic, intestinal, and placental) were obtained.  Immunohistochemical staining with the specific MoAb showed that the cell membrane and cytoplasm of cancer cells were stained in gastric and colorectal carcinoma.  The incidence of PLAP positivity was 23% (25 of 107) of all gastric carcinomas.  Among gastric carcinomas, the 42% (13 of 31) positivity of highly differentiated carcinoma (papillary adenocarcinoma and well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma) was a significantly higher rate than that found in poorly differentiated carcinoma (poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and signet-ring cell carcinoma, five of 41, 12%).  The incidence of PLAP positivity was 11% (four of 35) in colorectal carcinoma.  In contrast, gastric adenoma, intestinal metaplasia, and noncancerous tissue adjacent to cancer did not show staining.  These results indicated that expression of PLAP was apt to occur in more highly differentiated gastric carcinoma and was highly specific for carcinoma in the gastrointestinal tract, although its incidence was not high.
Cancer antigen 125, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate determinant 19-9 in ovarian tumors.  The authors studied data of combination assays of tumor markers, because simultaneous elevation of different types of tumor markers in the serum was puzzling.  They interpreted such phenomena regarding cancer antigen 125, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate determinant 19-9 in ovarian tumors.  The tissue expression of the antigens was compared with preoperative serum levels.  Several different factors were found to cause the simultaneous elevation of two or three of these markers in the serum.  Furthermore, even when the levels of some of the tumor markers were raised in the serum, the ovarian tumor did not always produce the marker by itself.  This study indicates that immunohistochemical identification of a marker in tumor tissue is prerequisite to the use of that marker in the serum to monitor disease status.
Chondrolipoangioma. A cartilage-containing benign mesenchymoma of soft tissue.  The clinical and pathologic features of four cases of benign mesenchymoma in which mature cartilage represented the predominant component are reported.  The distinctive histologic feature in all four cases was a lobular proliferation of cartilaginous tissue exhibiting a spectrum of hyaline cartilage, fibrocartilage, myxoid cartilage, and cartilage with ossification and even bone marrow formation, intimately associated with mature adipose tissue and vascular elements.  The localization of these tumors was in the proximity of a bone, but not attached to the periosteum or in continuity with a joint.  Because these lesions may be mistaken for other cartilaginous neoplasms of soft tissue, recognition of this entity has potentially important diagnostic and therapeutic implications in that mutilating surgery may be avoided.
Fallopian tube cancer. The Roswell Park experience.  Sixty-four patients with primary fallopian tube cancer treated at Roswell Park Memorial Institute from 1964 to 1987 underwent retrospective clinicopathologic review.  In 40 patients fallopian tube cancer was the only primary, but in 24 patients primary fallopian tube cancer was part of a multifocal upper genital tract malignancy.  Of the 40 patients with unifocal fallopian disease, the median survival was 28 months.  Only 15% of patients were alive and disease free with follow-up ranging from 22 to 141 months (median, 90.5 months).  Survival was not associated with stage of disease, tumor histology, grade, or depth of invasion in this series.  Fourteen patients who received cisplatin-based chemotherapy were evaluable for response.  Three patients (21%) responded; two complete and one partial.  Twelve patients without clinical evidence of disease underwent second-look procedures, ten laparotomy and two laparoscopy.  Four of ten second-look laparotomies were negative.  Secondary debulking was done in three of four patients with gross disease, one of which had a negative third-look laparotomy.  Negative laparotomy, second-look or third-look, was associated with improved survival (P = 0.016).  One of the two laparoscopies was negative, but the patient recurred.  In the remaining 24 patients cancer of the fallopian tube was part of a multifocal upper genital tract malignancy.  In 12 patients tubal disease was invasive, and in 12, it was in situ.  Separate primaries occurred in the ovaries (n = 20); uterus (n = 7); and cervix (n = 2).  This represents 1.3% of ovarian malignancies treated at Roswell Park Memorial Institute during the study period.  Fallopian tube cancer seems as virulent as ovarian cancer with few long-term survivors.  It is frequently associated with other sites of upper genital tract malignancy.  Second-look laparotomy is an important predictor of survival.  Second-look laparoscopy may be useful if positive.
Extrahepatic metabolism of morphine occurs in humans.  The pharmacokinetics of morphine was studied in six patients in whom a radiologic localization of an insulinoma was to be performed under general anesthesia.  Sampling was done in the peripheral artery, the mesenteric vein in five of the six patients, the hepatic vein, and the peripheral vein, as well as in urine.  Hepatic blood flow was estimated by an indocyanine green infusion technique at the end of the radiologic procedure.  Morphine terminal half-life was 92 +/- 9 minutes, total body clearance was 1260 ml.min-1, and the hepatic extraction ratio was 0.65 +/- 0.11.  No concentration gradient was observed between the artery and the superior mesenteric vein, showing that no gut wall metabolism of morphine occurred.  The total body clearance exceeded the hepatic clearance by 38%.  It was concluded that the extrahepatic extraintestinal clearance of morphine probably occurred through the kidney.
Insulin-like growth factor binding protein secretion by breast carcinoma cell lines: correlation with estrogen receptor status.  Breast tumor cell lines have been shown to secrete several distinct polypeptide growth factors, although conflicting results exist for the insulin-like growth factors (IGFs).  In contrast a limited number of breast tumor cell lines have definitely been shown to secrete the high affinity IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs) that modify IGF actions.  To characterize the types of IGFBPs that are secreted by breast tumor cell lines, conditioned medium was collected from seven separate tumor cell lines, three of which were estrogen receptor (ER) negative, and four of which were ER positive.  All three of the ER negative cell lines, MDA-231, MDA-330, and HS578T, secreted binding proteins of 49,000 and 43,000 Mr (IGFBP-3) as well as 29,000 (IGFBP-1) and 24,000 Mr.  In contrast, all four ER positive cell lines secreted 34,000 (IGFBP-2) or 24,000 Mr forms, and none secreted the 49,000 and 43,000 or 29,000 Mr forms.  BT-20, a cell line that is positive for ER messenger RNA (mRNA) but negative for ER protein, secreted predominantly a 34,000 Mr protein.  The amount of total IGFBP activity released in 24 h ranged between 0.4 and 5.6 nM equivalents of IGFBP-1, and there was no significant difference between the ER positive and negative cell lines.  The MCF-7 cells that produced predominantly 34,000 and 24,000 Mr forms showed a 1.8-fold increase in IGFBP secretion after estrogen stimulation.  Immunoblotting and a specific RIA for IGFBP-1 showed that only the ER negative lines MDA-330, MDA-231, and HS578T secreted this form.  Northern blotting analysis for the mRNA encoding this protein showed that both MDA-330 and MDA-231 contained a single 1.6 kilobase mRNA species that hybridized with an IGFBP-1 complementary DNA (cDNA) probe.  Immunoblotting analysis of the other cell lines showed that only the 34,000 Mr form secreted by the ER positive cell lines reacted with IGFBP-2 antisera.  Exposure of the conditioned media from the three ER negative cell lines to N-glycanase revealed that the 49,000 and 43,000 Mr forms of IGFBP were glycosylated and therefore probably represent IGFBP-3.  We conclude that ER negative cell lines secrete three forms of IGFBPs, IGFBP-1, IGFBP-3, and a 24,000 Mr form.  In contrast, the ER positive cell lines secrete predominantly IGFBP-2 and the 24,000 Mr form but do not secrete IGFBP-3 or 1.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
Alterations in opioid parameters in the hypothalamus of rats with estradiol-induced polycystic ovarian disease.  The distribution and density of selectively labeled mu-, delta-, and kappa-opioid binding sites were examined by in vitro radioautography in the hypothalamus of normal, estradiol valerate (EV)-injected, and estradiol (E2)-implanted female rats.  Hypothalamic beta-endorphin concentration was also examined by RIA in these three groups of animals.  Quantitative analysis of film radioautographs demonstrated a selective increase in mu-opioid binding in the medial preoptic area of EV-treated, but not of E2-implanted rats.  However, both these estrogenized groups exhibited a reduction in the density of delta-opioid binding in the suprachiasmatic nucleus.  Statistically significant changes between either estrogenized groups were not observed for kappa-opioid binding.  Results on the hypothalamic concentration of beta-endorphin indicated a marked reduction in EV-injected animals with respect to controls.  In contrast, the E2-implanted animals exhibited beta-endorphin concentrations similar to controls.  The present results confirm the increase in opioid receptor binding previously reported in the hypothalamus of EV-treated rats and further demonstrate that this increase is confined to the medial preoptic area and exclusively concerns mu-opioid receptors.  The concomitant reduction in beta-endorphin levels observed in the same group of animals suggests that the observed increase in mu-opioid binding could reflect a chronic up-regulation of the receptor in response to compromised beta-endorphin input.  Given the restriction of this effect to the site of origin of LHRH neurons and the demonstrated inhibitory role of opioids on LHRH release, it is tempting to postulate that such up-regulation could lead to the suppression of the plasma LH pattern that characterizes polycystic ovarian disease in the EV-treated rat.
Rapid inactivation and phosphorylation of pyroglutamyl peptidase II in Y-79 human retinoblastoma cells after exposure to phorbol ester.  Pyroglutamyl peptidase II (EC 3.4.19.-), a membrane-bound metalloproteinase, is a highly specific TRH-degrading enzyme.  Exposure of Y-79 human retinoblastoma cells to 12-0-tetradecanoyl phorbol 13-acetate (TPA) decreased the activity of this enzyme in a time- and concentration-dependent manner (IC50 5 x 10(-9) M).  After 15 min of TPA treatment, only 10% of pyroglutamyl peptidase II activity remained.  TPA treatment did not affect the activity of the cytosolic enzyme pyroglutamyl peptidase I (EC 3.4.19.3) or the membrane-bound enzyme dipeptidyl peptidase IV (EC 3.4.19.3).  Pretreatment of the cells with the protein kinase C inhibitors H-7 or sphingosine prevented the inactivation of pyroglutamyl peptidase II by TPA.  The time course of the TPA-mediated effect paralleled the time course of translocation and activation of protein kinase C in this cell line.  Immunoblot analysis demonstrated that inactivation of pyroglutamyl peptidase II was not due to dissociation or internalization of this enzyme molecule.  Incubation of TPA-activated Y-79 cell membranes with gamma-[32P]-ATP followed by immunoprecipitation revealed a time-dependent phosphorylation of a 48 kilodalton subunit of pyroglutamyl peptidase II.  These studies indicate that the phorbol ester effect is mediated by protein kinase C, and reveal a mechanism of potentiation of the action of TRH at its target sites.
Ability of circular extrachromosomal DNA molecules to carry amplified MYCN proto-oncogenes in human neuroblastomas in vivo.  Amplification of the proto-oncogene MYCN (also known as N-myc) in neuroblastomas has been shown to correlate with both disease stage and prognosis, yet little is known about the DNA structures that carry amplified MYCN genes in neuroblastomas in vivo.  We have used DNA irradiation and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis to analyze MYCN amplification structures in eight neuroblastomas from separate patients (four primary tumors and four metastatic lesions exhibiting MYCN amplification).  Six of the eight neuroblastomas (three primary tumors and three metastatic lesions) exhibited MYCN DNA irradiation profiles consistent with the presence of circular extrachromosomal DNA amplification structures.  Five neuroblastomas possessed amplification structures within the size range of double minute chromosomes, and one contained smaller DNA circles.  Two neuroblastomas exhibited MYCN DNA irradiation patterns consistent with larger (presumably chromosomal) amplification structures.  Multiple sizes of DNA circles were observed in the neuroblastomas of four different patients, implying in vivo multimerization of amplification structures.  The presence of circular MYCN amplification structures in six of eight neuroblastomas examined suggests that circular DNA molecules are important structures in in vivo gene amplification.
Segregation analysis of breast cancer from the cancer and steroid hormone study: histologic subtypes   The segregation pattern of breast cancer in white families from the Cancer and Steroid Hormone Study was investigated.  Families were categorized into four groups based on the histologic type of breast cancer in the probands:ductal cancer, lobular cancer, adenocarcinoma, and medullary cancer.  The ductal cancer sample was further split into a premenopausal-proband and a postmenopausal-proband subset.  Results for six complex segregation analyses are presented; the findings suggest heterogeneity in the transmission of breast cancer.  For all analyses, there was no evidence for a multifactorial component in the mixed model, ie, a major locus plus other transmission, genetic and/or cultural.  Interpretation of the medullary cancer, adenocarcinoma, and lobular cancer analyses does not permit discrimination among the major locus models.  Segregation of breast cancer in the entire ductal sample was consistent with autosomal recessive transmission.  In the ductal subanalyses, a recessive gene was sufficient to explain the breast cancer distribution when the proband had postmenopausal breast cancer.  In contrast, when the proband had premenopausal breast cancer, the transmission model was consistent with a dominant major gene, with sporadic cases of disease.
Results of stereotactic brachytherapy used in the initial management of patients with glioblastoma.  Recent studies have shown a survival benefit for patients with recurrent glioblastomas treated with stereotactic brachytherapy.  On the basis of these encouraging results, we began a prospective study in 1987 to evaluate the use of brachytherapy in patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma.  Patients were considered eligible for this study if they met the following criteria: Karnofsky performance status 70% or greater; tumor size not greater than 5 cm in any dimension; a radiographically well delineated, supratentorial lesion not involving the ependymal surfaces; and pathologically confirmed glioblastoma.  We treated 35 such patients between 1987 and 1990 with stereotactic brachytherapy as part of their initial therapy.  The treatment protocol involved surgery, partial brain external-beam radiotherapy (59.4 Gy in 33 fractions), and stereotactic brachytherapy with temporary high-activity iodine 125 sources giving an additional 50 Gy to the tumor bed.  Chemotherapy was not used in the initial management of these 35 patients.  To compare our results with those obtained in a matched control group, we identified 40 patients with glioblastoma treated with surgery and external radiotherapy, with or without chemotherapy, between 1977 and 1986 at our institution.  These patients had clinical and radiographic characteristics that would have made them eligible for the brachytherapy protocol.  Survival rates at 1 and 2 years after diagnosis were 87% and 57%, respectively, for patients receiving brachytherapy versus 40% and 12.5%, respectively, for the controls (P less than .001).  We conclude that stereotactic brachytherapy improves the survival of patients with glioblastoma when it can be incorporated into the initial treatment approach.  Unfortunately, only about one in four patients with glioblastoma are suitable candidates for brachytherapy at the time of initial presentation.
Effects of FUdR on primary-cultured colon carcinomas metastatic to the liver.  Hepatic arterial infusion of fluorodeoxyuridine (FUdR) has demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of metastatic colorectal carcinoma of the liver.  In this study, the direct cytotoxic effect of FUdR was measured on ten metastatic and two primary-site colorectal carcinomas in a primary culture assay system.  Overall, clinically achievable concentrations of FUdR (0.4 to 4 microM) induced partial cell kill in 75% of tumors, including a greater than 50% reduction in viable tumor cell number in only two tumors and less than 50% in the remaining seven.  Total cell kill was not observed in any tumor.  Three tumors were resistant to these FUdR concentrations.  Tumor sensitivity correlated with the size of the tumor growth fraction.  Increasing the exposure time to FUdR from 3 to 7 days approximately doubled the magnitude of the response.  5-Flurouracil and cisplatin, at clinically achievable concentrations, were more toxic to metastatic tumor cells than FUdR.  Because of the limited chemosensitivity of metastatic colorectal tumor cells to FUdR in vitro, we postulate that other mechanisms besides direct cytotoxicity contribute to the clinical efficacy of FUdR in vivo.
Cryoprobe as a "handle" for resection of metastatic liver tumors.  Resection of metastatic liver tumors can be a difficult and risky procedure.  Using a cryoprobe as a "handle" can greatly facilitate resection by providing a taut surface for transection and improving visualization of ductal and vascular structures.  In addition, this technique may decrease the risk of contaminating surrounding tissues with cancer cells, and may inhibit tumor recurrence within the margins of resection.
Extended neck dissection.  From the time Crile described radical neck dissection in 1906, this surgical procedure became popular in the management of metastatic cancer in the neck.  Over the past two decades, the modified neck dissection has been effectively utilized for conservation of function and cosmesis while achieving the same oncologic goals.  However, there are several instances where the above standard procedures are not adequate for resection of malignant tumors.  Although there is a definite trend toward conservation procedures, extended neck dissection is often necessary especially in patients with N2 and N3 disease.  Apart from the standard structures removed in radical neck dissection, the other structures removed in extended neck dissection include skin, the digastric muscle, hypoglossal nerve, vagus nerve, sympathetic chain, ramus mandibularis, carotid artery, tracheo-esophageal nodes, etc.  Over the past seven years, we have performed 40 extended neck dissections.  All the patients had N2 or N3 disease in the neck.  Nine patients had unknown primaries.  Thirteen patients had their primary tumors in the oral cavity and 11 in the laryngopharynx.  Five patients had primary tumor in the salivary glands and two patients had metastatic melanoma.  Patients who underwent extensive skin excision had pectoralis myocutaneous flap reconstruction.  All patients received postoperative radiation therapy.  One patient died of cardiac problems 4 weeks after operation.  Local control was achieved in 70%.  The most difficult region for local control was the disease behind the mastoid process, and the most difficult problems were patients with involvement of the subdermal lymphatics.  Our data suggests that there are definite situations where extended neck dissection is indicated with satisfactory local control of the nodal disease.
Gamma-detecting probe and autoradiographic studies of radiolabeled antibody B72.3 in CX-1 colon xenografts.  Nude mice bearing CX-1 colon tumors were injected with 50 microCi 125I-labeled monoclonal antibody (MAb) B72.3.  Radioactivity in tumors was studied with the gamma detecting probe (GDP) on days 1, 3, 7, and 10 after MAb injection.  On each day, two mice were sacrificed and sections were examined with autoradiography (ARG), immunoperoxidase methods (IMP), and routine stains.  Mean probe counts showed increasing tumor to background ratios and ARG demonstrated a progressive increase in radionuclide in the tumors.  The distribution of 125I was primarily around the vascular spaces on day 1, but by day 3 and progressively it appeared in tumor gland lumina and necrotic areas.  A regional correlation was shown between radionuclide in vascular spaces and its sequestration in tumor elements.
Long survival and prognostic factors in hepatocellular carcinoma.  We studied survival and prognostic factors in all cases of hepatocellular carcinoma seen at a Midwestern teaching hospital from 1947 through 1986.  Of the 70 cases, 56 were diagnosed during life and 14 at autopsy.  There were 47 males and 23 females with age at diagnosis ranging from 14 to 88.  Median survival for the 56 patients diagnosed during life was 106 days.  Only 11 patients lived longer than one year.  Two patients were long survivors and presumed cured, one living 27 years after diagnosis and surgical treatment and the other 19 years.  Cox regression model showed young age at diagnosis and low stage of disease at diagnosis to be significant predictors of long survival.  White patients survived nearly twice as long as black patients but the difference was not significant.  Gender and year of diagnosis did not appear to be important determinants of survival.  Pathologic material was still available for one of the two long survivors and the histology was that of fibrolamellar carcinoma of young adults.
Community lifestyle characteristics and risk of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia in children.  High rates of leukaemia in children and young people have been associated with features of community isolation and population growth.  Incidence data collected by two specialist registries were used to compare incidence rates at ward level with relevant ward characteristics derived from routine census and Ordnance Survey data for England and Wales.  An excess risk of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) was found for wards which are farthest from large urban centres.  The excess was greatest for wards of higher socioeconomic status and for children aged 1-7 years (the childhood peak), for which a two-fold excess was seen.  These findings in general support the hypothesis that childhood leukaemia has an infectious aetiology.
Multisurface method of pattern separation for medical diagnosis applied to breast cytology.  Multisurface pattern separation is a mathematical method for distinguishing between elements of two pattern sets.  Each element of the pattern sets is comprised of various scalar observations.  In this paper, we use the diagnosis of breast cytology to demonstrate the applicability of this method to medical diagnosis and decision making.  Each of 11 cytological characteristics of breast fine-needle aspirates reported to differ between benign and malignant samples was graded 1 to 10 at the time of sample collection.  Nine characteristics were found to differ significantly between benign and malignant samples.  Mathematically, these values for each sample were represented by a point in a nine-dimensional space of real variables.  Benign points were separated from malignant ones by planes determined by linear programming.  Correct separation was accomplished in 369 of 370 samples (201 benign and 169 malignant).  In the one misclassified malignant case, the fine-needle aspirate cytology was so definitely benign and the cytology of the excised cancer so definitely malignant that we believe the tumor was missed on aspiration.  Our mathematical method is applicable to other medical diagnostic and decision-making problems.
Embryonic stem cell virus, a recombinant murine retrovirus with expression in embryonic stem cells.  The expression of Moloney murine leukemia virus and vectors derived from it is restricted in undifferentiated mouse embryonal carcinoma and embryonal stem (ES) cells.  We have developed a retroviral vector, the murine embryonic stem cell virus (MESV), that is active in embryonal carcinoma and ES cells.  MESV was derived from a retroviral mutant [PCC4-cell-passaged myeloproliferative sarcoma virus (PCMV)] expressed in embryonal carcinoma cells but not in ES cells.  The enhancer region of PCMV was shown to be functional in both cell types, but sequences within the 5' untranslated region of PCMV were found to restrict viral expression in ES cells.  Replacement of this region by related sequences obtained from the dl-587rev retrovirus results in MESV, a modified PCMV virus that confers G418 resistance to fibroblasts and ES cells with similar efficiencies.  Expression of MESV in ES cells is mediated by transcriptional regulatory elements within the 5' long terminal repeat of the viral genome.
Glucocorticoids locally disrupt an array of positioned nucleosomes on the rat tyrosine aminotransferase promoter in hepatoma cells.  Transcriptional activation by steroid hormones is often associated with the appearance of a DNase I hypersensitive site resulting from a local alteration of the nucleoprotein structure of the promoter.  For the mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat, a viral promoter under glucocorticoid control, a model has been proposed: the appearance of the hormonodependent DNase I hypersensitive site reflects the displacement of a single precisely positioned nucleosome associated with the glucocorticoid responsive elements.  To determine if such a mechanism is of general relevance in transcriptional activation by steroid hormones, we have investigated the nucleosomal organization of the rat tyrosine aminotransferase promoter over a 1-kilobase region that contains the glucocorticoid regulatory target.  This region displays a hormonodependent DNase I hypersensitive site.  In the absence of hormone, micrococcal nuclease digestion of nuclei demonstrates the presence of positioned nucleosomes, with cutting sites centered around positions -3080, -2900, -2700, -2800, -2255, and -2040.  Treatment of the cells with dexamethasone induces a disruption of the chromatin structure over a relatively short stretch of DNA (approximately positions -2400 to -2650) that overlaps two nucleosomes.  These observations suggest a strong similarity in the role of chromatin structure in glucocorticoid-dependent transcriptional activation of mouse mammary tumor virus and tyrosine aminotransferase promoters.
Vaccination against tumor cells expressing breast cancer epithelial tumor antigen.  Ninety-one percent of breast tumors aberrantly express an epithelial tumor antigen (ETA) identified by monoclonal antibody H23.  Vaccinia virus recombinants expressing tumor antigens have considerable promise in the active immunotherapy of cancer, and we have evaluated the potential of vaccinia recombinants expressing the secreted (S) and cell-associated (transmembrane, T) forms of H23 ETA to elicit immunity to tumor cells expressing ETA.  Tumorigenic ras-transformed Fischer rat fibroblast lines FR-S and FR-T, expressing the S or T form of H23 ETA, respectively, were constructed for use in challenge experiments.  Expression of H23 ETA in these lines was confirmed by Western blotting and immunofluorescence.  When challenged by subcutaneous seeding of tumor cells, 97% (FR-S) and 91% (FR-T) of syngeneic Fischer rats rapidly developed tumors that failed to regress.  Vaccination with recombinant vaccinia virus expressing ETA-T prior to challenge prevented tumor development in 82% of animals seeded with FR-T cells but in only 61% of animals seeded with FR-S.  The vaccinia recombinant expressing the S form was a less effective immunogen, and vaccination protected only 29-30% of animals from developing tumors upon challenge with either FR-S or -T cells.  The increased immunogenicity of the recombinant expressing ETA-T was reflected in elevated levels of ETA-reactive antibody in vaccinated animals, confirming that secreted antigens expressed from vaccinia virus are less effective immunogens than their membrane-associated counterparts.
Recognition by ELAM-1 of the sialyl-Lex determinant on myeloid and tumor cells.  Endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule-1 (ELAM-1) is an endothelial cell adhesion molecule that allows myeloid cells to attach to the walls of blood vessels adjacent to sites of inflammation.  ELAM-1 recognizes the sialyl-Lewis X (sialyl-Lex) determinant, NeuAc alpha 2-3Gal beta 1-4(Fuc alpha 1-3)GlcNAc-, a granulocyte carbohydrate also found on the surface of some tumor cell lines.  Binding of myeloid cells to soluble ELAM-1 is inhibited by a monoclonal antibody recognizing sialyl-Lex or by proteins bearing sialyl-Lex, some of which may participate in humoral regulation of myeloid cell adhesion.  Stimulated granulocytes also release an inhibitor of ELAM-1 binding that can be selectively adsorbed by monoclonal antibody to sialyl-Lex.
Head and neck paragangliomas: a clinicopathologic study with DNA flow cytometric analysis.  A total of 11 head and neck paragangliomas were the subject of pathologic study, including histologic, immunohistochemical, and DNA flow cytometric analyses.  We cannot absolutely predict aggressive clinical behavior using histologic parameters alone, but we can use such parameters to segregate patients into low-risk and high-risk groups.  Several trends were observed in the current study.  Tumors with higher S-phase fractions, G2/M fractions, or aneuploid cell populations tended to behave "aggressively." The presence of sustentacular cells in the primary tumors cannot be used as an absolute indicator of tumor metastatic potential, as two metastatic paragangliomas in this study contained sustentacular cells in both the primary and metastatic lesions.  DNA ploidy status cannot be used as an absolute prognostic parameter as the two metastatic tumors were composed of diploid primary and metastatic lesions.  The three tumors with aneuploid cell populations showed "aggressive" histologic and clinical features, but the length of the follow-up period for these cases is too limited to draw any conclusions.  Although no absolute criteria can be used at present to gauge aggressiveness, close follow-up of these patients is essential, especially if pathologic findings suggest an "aggressive" course (ie, "malignant" histology, higher S-phase fractions, G2/M fractions, aneuploid cell populations, or decreased sustentacular cell density).
Breast cancer: the military's experience at Wilford Hall USAF Medical Center.  We reviewed the experience with breast cancer at Wilford Hall USAF Medical Center for the years 1978 through 1988.  A total of 868 cases were identified in the Wilford Hall Tumor Registry; overall 5-year and 10-year survivals were 63% and 39%, respectively.  Infiltrating ductal carcinoma represented the principal histologic category.  The other predominant variants included invasive lobular carcinoma, lobular carcinoma in situ, and ductal carcinoma in situ.  Until recently, most of these patients (90%) had modified radical mastectomy as their definitive surgical therapy, with chemotherapy reserved primarily for patients with advanced disease.
Pedunculated giant lipoma of the esophagus.  A patient with a giant lipoma of the esophagus presented with progressive dysphagia and odynophagia, fever, and recurrent melena.  Two years previously, when the symptoms were less pronounced, it had been misdiagnosed as achalasia.  After surgical removal of the lipoma, the patient became symptom free.
Primary leiomyoma of the liver.  A 30-yr-old woman with right upper quadrant abdominal pain was found to have a hepatic leiomyoma.  This is the youngest patient in whom this rare tumor has been found.  The diagnostic approach toward gastrointestinal leiomyomata is emphasized, including the role of immunohistochemistry.
The role of attitudes, beliefs, and personal characteristics of Italian physicians in the surgical treatment of early breast cancer.  The influence of Italian physicians' attitudes, beliefs, and personal characteristics on medical decision making is examined in the case of surgical treatment of early breast cancer.  Responses to a mail survey of 657 physicians from different specialties were analyzed comparing doctors recommending a radical procedure (9%) to those preferring a conservative procedure for younger patients only (25%), and those considering conservative surgery the treatment of choice regardless of patients' age (66%).  The findings suggest that the likelihood of physicians' preferring a conservative procedure is influenced by their specialty and the extent to which they feel that a patient should have a role in the treatment decision more than by differences in the beliefs of treatment outcomes.  Only preferences of the small group indicating radical surgery as the sole admissible treatment can be accounted for by ignorance or distrust of results of recent trials.  These findings suggest that other than scientific factors guide many doctors in their decision making; they may help to explain why the diffusion of research results into clinical practice is often disappointingly slow.
Characteristics of duodenal wall gastrinomas.  Fifteen patients with duodenal wall gastrinomas (DWGs) and the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome have been treated since 1960.  In 6 of 11 patients, DWGs were recognized at operation and totally excised.  In four patients, the tumor was subsequently found in the proximal duodenum of the surgical specimens.  In 12 patients, DWGs were single and lymph node metastases were present in 8.  In three patients, DWGs were multiple and lymph node metastases were present in two.  All DWGs were submucosal and all were located in the first or second portions of the duodenum except one found in the fourth portion.  Tumor size ranged from 1 to 15 mm, and nine were less than 5 mm.  Of 12 patients with single DWGs, 9 have remained eugastrinemic after resection (mean follow-up: 5.5 years).  None of the patients with multiple DWGs became eugastrinemic after surgery.  DWGs are characteristically single, small or microscopic, submucosal, located in the proximal duodenum, rarely metastasize to the liver, and are usually curable by surgical resection.
Selective nonoperative management of patients referred with abnormal mammograms.  Screening mammography provides a means of detecting clinically occult breast carcinoma, but the question of whether all abnormal mammograms require biopsy remains unanswered.  We retrospectively reviewed records of 214 women referred over an 8-year period for abnormal mammograms.  They were selectively assigned to biopsy or mammographic follow-up based on specific mammographic criteria.  Of 114 women initially observed mammographically, 2 were later found by biopsy to have carcinoma.  Initial assignment to mammographic observation delayed the recommendation for biopsy 3 and 12 months, respectively, in these patients, but no effect on outcome was documented.  Because they have benign lesions by clinical and mammographic criteria, 102 women (53%) have been spared biopsy; they continue to be monitored closely.  We believe these data support the use of a selective approach to biopsy based on specific mammographic criteria.
Multimodal therapy in locally advanced breast carcinoma.  Among 879 patients treated for breast cancer between 1975 and 1984, advanced disease was found in 125 (14%).  A subgroup of 34 (4%) presented with untreated locally advanced disease without demonstrable distant metastases at the time of diagnosis (stage IIIB = T4abed, NX-2,MO).  During the first 5 years (1975 through 1979), 17 patients were treated primarily with sequential radiotherapy and chemotherapy (Group A).  From 1980 to 1984 (Group B), the management consisted of four courses of induction multi-drug chemotherapy followed primarily by mastectomy and additional chemotherapy.  The mean follow-up for the most recent group (Group B) is 48 months.  Follow-up was complete.  While the local disease control rate was the same for both groups (76%), the survival was remarkably different.  Group A patients experienced a median survival of 15 months, and only one survived 5 years.  In Group B, the median survival was 56 months with nine patients (53%) alive between 40 and 76 months, seven (41%) of whom are 5-year survivors.  While the overall mortality of patients with inflammatory breast cancer was greater in both groups when compared with the group with noninflammatory disease, the survival of patients in Group B was better than in Group A for both inflammatory and noninflammatory cancers (p less than 0.01).  Estrogen receptor, nodal, and menopausal status did not influence survival.  These data suggest that neoadjuvant chemotherapy improves survival for patients with stage IIIB breast carcinoma and delays the establishment or progression of distant metastases.  Mastectomy is an important component in the treatment of this disease.
Tyrosine kinase and control of cell proliferation.  The usefulness of phosphotyrosine antibodies for the detection of physiologically regulated or deregulated tyrosine kinases is discussed in this report.  This rather rare enzymatic activity is shared by receptors for some polypeptide growth factors and by the products of Class 1 oncogenes.  The antibodies are able to detect proteins phosphorylated on tyrosine in fibroblasts stimulated with growth factors such as EGF and PDGF.  The major phosphorylated protein species are the receptors themselves, which undergo phosphorylation only after the addition of the exogenous factor and only transiently.  Phosphotyrosine antibodies were able to detect the products of the retroviral Class 1 oncogenes, which are endowed with deregulated tyrosine kinase activity.  In fact, in these cases a constitutive phosphorylation of the relevant proteins was observed, which occurred continuously and independently of the presence or lack of exogenous ligands.  A tyrosine kinase constitutively activated in human gastric carcinoma cells was detected by P-Tyr antibodies.  This molecule has been characterized at the molecular level, and the mechanisms responsible for its enzymatic activation have been investigated.  The question of whether the tyrosine kinase identified is responsible for the induction and the maintenance of the transformed phenotype in gastric carcinomas remains to be answered.  It is reasonable to suggest that this might be the case by analogy with other situations such as Class 1 oncogenes activated by transduction by retroviruses, abnormal expression of EGF receptors, or deregulated activity of c-abl-encoded proteins in chronic myelogenous leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia.  Thus, the search for deregulated kinases by means of phosphotyrosine antibodies seems to be useful for identifying new activated oncogenes in clinical oncology.
Internists' practices in health promotion and disease prevention. A survey.  OBJECTIVE: To estimate internists' use of disease prevention and health promotion activities, and to explore demographic, professional, behavioral, psychological, cognitive, and organizational factors associated with the use of such practices.  DESIGN: Mail survey.  SETTING AND SUBJECTS: A sample of 2610 members and fellows of the American College of Physicians (ACP) participated in the study.  They engaged in patient care activities more than 20 hours per week and were stratified by gender and region.  They lived in four geographic areas of the United States (Northeast, Southeast, Central, and West), comprising 21 ACP regions.  MEASUREMENTS: A questionnaire requesting background information as well as information about personal health; record keeping; use of immunizations (pneumococcal, influenza, tetanus, hepatitis B); use of screening tests and procedures for detecting cancer (breast examination, Papanicolaou smear, stool occult blood test) and other diseases (electrocardiograms, cholesterol level tests, chest radiographs); and behavioral counseling to promote health (in the areas of smoking, exercise, and alcohol and seat belt use).  MAIN RESULTS: Internists used effective preventive interventions less frequently and ineffective practices more frequently than experts recommend.  Internists' use of health promotion and disease prevention activities is associated with habit, attitude, and a lack of adequate knowledge.  Younger physician age, general internal medicine practice, and personal health promotion and disease prevention practices were strongly associated with more appropriate use of recommended practices (P less than 0.01).  CONCLUSIONS: Internists' use of disease prevention and health promotion activities falls short of expert recommendations.  Programs to improve the delivery of preventive services might be aimed at improving physicians' personal health practices, might be directed toward patients, and might include the development of effective systems to remind physicians.
Enhanced expression of c-myc and H-ras oncogenes in Letterer-Siwe disease. A sequential study using colorimetric in situ hybridization.  Tissues from two patients with disseminated histiocytosis X (Letterer-Siwe disease) in which histiocytosis X cells exhibited histologic and cytologic features of malignancy were evaluated by in situ hybridization with the use of biotinylated nucleic acid probes to c-myc and H-ras oncogenes.  Enhanced expression of these oncogenes was observed in mononucleated and multinucleated cells of histiocytosis X in the terminal proliferative phase but not in the early quiescent phase of Letterer-Siwe disease in both patients.  Our findings indicate that deregulation of c-myc and H-ras in histiocytosis X are late events that likely confer a selective growth advantage to histiocytosis X cells.
Bilateral familial carotid body paragangliomas. Report of a case with DNA flow cytometric and cytogenetic analyses.  A case study of bilateral familial carotid body paragangliomas with DNA flow cytometric and cytogenetic analyses is presented.  Analysis of tumor cell nuclear DNA content by flow cytometry revealed aneuploid cell populations in both tumors.  Standard cytogenetic analysis (Giemsa-banding technique used) of the right carotid body paraganglioma showed no evidence of numerical or structural abnormalities.  We describe parameters currently used to "predict" biological behavior in these tumors.
Soft-tissue tumor with abnormal amianthoid collagen fibers.  Electron microscopic examination of a solitary soft-tissue tumor from the face demonstrated large areas with abnormal amianthoid collagen fibers in the neoplasm.  The lesion was classified as a benign neoplasm of myofibroblasts and tentatively named a myofibroblastoma.  The significance of the amianthoid collagen fibers is unknown.  Normal native collagen fibers were found in some parts of the neoplasm.
Shear stress induces not only platelet aggregation but also platelet-tumor cell interaction.  To investigate the interaction between platelets and tumor cells under well-defined flow conditions, the effect of tumor cells on platelet aggregation induced by shear stress was studied using a cone and plate viscometer adapted for measuring transmitted light intensity.  Aggregation was markedly enhanced by HMV-1 cells in a cell number-dependent fashion under shear stress of 12 dyne/cm2.  Enhancement was not observed at a high shear stress of 108 dyne/cm2.  A monoclonal antibody against GPIIb/IIIa, 7E3 completely abolished enhancement of aggregation by HMV-1.  Apyrase had similar inhibitory effects.  Scanning electronmicroscopy showed that direct contacts of platelets with HMV-1 cells could be demonstrated when platelet-platelet interaction was inhibited by 7E3 or apyrase.  These results may indicate that, at a shear stress of 12 dyne/cm2, direct contacts of platelets and HMV-1 cells may trigger enhancement of platelet aggregation.
Basic studies on a new material for inducing antitumor immune cells.  Recently, adoptive immunotherapy for cancer with lymphokine activated killer (LAK) cells has been widely used experimentally.  The therapy has several problems, including difficulty in handling, sterilization, and time consumption.  To solve these problems, new materials able to induce antitumor immune cells were investigated.  Pokeweed mitogen (PWM) and PWM-conjugated materials (CMC-1) could induce strong killer cells by short-term stimulation of human peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL).  The induced killer cells showed a wide killing spectrum in vitro against human tumor cell lines (MKK-1, PRMI4788, NBT-2, ZR-7530, H-1, Hela, KB, HMV-1, PC-10, C-1).  Human PBL stimulated for a short time by CMC-1 also showed a tumoricidal effect on tumor bearing (MKN-1, MKN-45) nude mice.  These results suggest that CMC-1 may solve the problems with currently used LAK therapy and may provide easily applicable extracorporeal immunotherapy for cancer.
Fine needle aspiration biopsy in the diagnosis and management of fibroadenoma of the breast.  Cytological and histological biopsies were obtained on 75 breast lumps clinically diagnosed as fibroadenomas.  Of these, 95 per cent of lesions were benign.  In 51 (68 per cent) confirmed as fibroadenomas histologically, cytology was benign in 78 per cent, but inadequate for diagnosis in 16 per cent.  The remaining 24 lesions included three breast cancers and one lymph node with Hodgkin's disease.  In this group cytology was inadequate for diagnosis in 54 per cent, including one breast cancer.  No lesion with benign cytology was subsequently shown to be malignant.  The study supports the view that clinical diagnosis and cytology are accurate in the diagnosis of benign breast disease of this type.  Breast cancer may rarely present with the clinical features of a fibroadenoma and too few lesions have been studied to assess fully the performance of cytological biopsy in detecting these small mobile lesions.  A non-excisional policy should therefore include prolonged follow-up and repeat biopsy.
Regional chemotherapy for colorectal liver metastases: a phase II evaluation of targeted hepatic arterial 5-fluorouracil for colorectal liver metastases.  The results of systemic chemotherapy in patients with liver metastases from colorectal cancer remain dismal.  Regional chemotherapy has been advocated as a method of improving the delivery of cytotoxic drugs to tumour, while minimizing systemic toxicity.  The use of vasoactive agents to redistribute arterial blood flow towards tumour, and of biodegradable microspheres to slow tumour blood flow, have also been suggested as methods of further improving tumour exposure to drug.  We present 21 patients who received intrahepatic arterial chemotherapy for colorectal liver metastases.  Combined treatment (angiotensin II, albumin microspheres and 5-fluorouracil) was administered 4-6 weekly, and bolus 5-fluorouracil was given in the intervening weeks.  Toxicity was minimal.  Responses were seen in seven patients.  Fewer than half of the deaths were from liver metastases; a quarter of the patients died from non-cancer-related causes.  Survival was prolonged in the treated group compared with historical controls.  These results suggest that this regimen has activity in patients with colorectal liver metastases.
Hepatic metastases from colorectal carcinoma: impact of surgical resection on the natural history.  From 1960 to 1987, 1209 patients with colorectal liver metastases were recorded, and followed until 1 January 1990.  In 242 cases the diagnosis was based on external imaging, whereas 967 patients had operative confirmation and staging of their liver disease.  Three groups of patients were analysed: group 1 involved 921 cases, of whom 902 were deemed non-resectable whereas 19 could not be unequivocally classified.  Only 21 patients lived for longer than 3 years, seven survived for 4 years, but there were no 5-year survivors.  Group 2 comprised 62 highly selected patients who at laparotomy demonstrated resectable metastatic spread confined to the liver, but this was not treated mainly because of a formerly different therapeutic approach.  These patients had a significantly longer median survival time (14.2 versus 6.9 months), but also failed to achieve 5-year survival.  The 226 patients forming group 3 underwent hepatic resection with intent to cure.  Nine of them had minimal macroscopic disease left, and 34 with all gross tumour removed had positive margins.  Survival of patients with these 43 eventually non-radical resections followed an identical course as in group 2 (median survival 13.3 months, maximum 42 months).  Of the 183 patients with potentially curative resection ten died after surgery (5.5 per cent).  Actuarial 5 and 10-year survival rates in the remaining 173 patients were 40 and 27 per cent with 25 and seven patients alive at respective periods of time.  Until 1 January 1990, 64 patients remained free from recurrent disease for up to 24 years.  In three patients the tumour status at death was unclear.  The other 106 patients developed definite cancer relapse.  Nevertheless they demonstrated a prolongation of survival time by a median of 1 year when compared with the 43 non-radically resected patients or the 62 untreated patients with resectable liver-only metastases, and accomplished a maximum survival time of 8 years.  Radical excision of colorectal secondaries to the liver therefore offers effective palliation, and in a small number the chance of a cure.
Association between extent of colonic mucosal sialomucin change and subsequent local recurrence after curative excision of primary colorectal cancer.  Two interrelated studies were carried out to determine whether extent of sialomucin change adjacent to a primary colorectal carcinoma predicted local tumour invasiveness and risk of local recurrence.  In the first, depth of tumour penetration was correlated with the length of the sialomucin band adjacent to 72 primary colorectal cancers.  There was a significant (P less than 0.05) increase in sialomucin band length adjacent to tumours invading adjacent structures compared with those which had not (Mann-Whitney U test), although there was no overall correlation between depth of penetration, Duke's classification or degree of differentiation (Kruskal-Wallis test).  A sialomucin band of greater than 3 cm was associated with a 70 per cent probability of adjacent structure (T4) invasion.  These observations were then tested prospectively in a second study involving 256 patients to determine whether the presence of a greater than 3 cm sialomucin band could predict local recurrence.  Presence of a greater than 3 cm sialomucin band was a significant (x2 = 7.12, d.f.  = 1, P less than 0.001) and independent predictor of local but not distant recurrence.  In addition both the interval to local recurrence and survival were significantly shorter if a greater than 3 cm sialomucin band was present.  However the accuracy of greater than 3 cm sialomucin band as a predictive test for local recurrence was only 70 per cent.  The extent of sialomucin adjacent to a primary colorectal cancer does provide a crude assessment of tumour invasiveness and risk of local recurrence.
The importance of calcium regulation in toxic cell injury. Studies utilizing the technology of digital imaging fluorescence microscopy.  The regulation of ions within the cell is of critical importance in both acute and chronic toxicology.  Recently, new methods have been developed for measuring such changes in living cells and correlating them with studies of structure, function, and biochemistry.  A major revolution has occurred from the linkage between the computer and the light microscope, which has resulted in the use of digital imaging fluorescence microscopy and video intensification microscopy coupled with image analysis.  These methods have already yielded much additional information and it is anticipated that their further application by pathologists and toxicologists will continue to uncover the important role of ion deregulation and toxic cell injury.
Role of ultrasound guided fine needle aspiration biopsy in the diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.  In 170 cases of hepatocellular carcinoma, ultrasound showed a high sensitivity in identifying focal liver lesions.  Fine needle aspiration biopsy guided by ultrasound yielded a pathological diagnosis in the majority of cases.  The advantages of this technique, its high diagnostic yield and low cost, render the older technique of blind percutaneous biopsy using a coarse needle obsolete.  Laparoscopy retains its essential role in selected cases.  Complementary use of fine needle aspiration biopsy under ultrasound guidance and laparoscopy assures the highest rate of diagnostic accuracy in hepatocellular carcinoma.  We confirm the poor sensitivity of alpha fetoprotein.
Function after amputation, arthrodesis, or arthroplasty for tumors about the knee.  We studied the function of twenty-two patients who had had a malignant skeletal tumor adjacent to the knee.  An above-the-knee amputation was done in seven; a resection arthrodesis, in nine; and a replacement arthroplasty, in six.  The patients all walked at a similar speed (sixty-one to sixty-six meters per minute), which is slower than normal (eighty meters per minute).  They all walked with comparable efficiency at three velocities: the mean consumption of oxygen was 0.210 milliliter per kilogram of body weight per meter at free velocity, 0.215 milliliter per kilogram of body weight per meter when they walked 25 per cent faster, and 0.211 to 0.240 milliliter per kilogram of body weight per meter when they walked 50 per cent faster.  The three groups of patients and a normal control group consumed oxygen at similar rates.  The patients who had had an amputation were very active, and they were the least worried about damaging the affected limb, but they had difficulty walking on steep, rough, or slippery surfaces.  The patients who had had an arthrodesis had a more stable limb and performed the most demanding physical work and recreational activities, but they had difficulty sitting.  The patients who had had an arthroplasty led sedentary lives and were the most protective of the limb, but they were the least self-conscious about the limb.
The Van Nes tibial rotationplasty. A functionally viable reconstructive procedure in children who have a tumor of the distal end of the femur.  Twelve patients who had a malignant tumor of the distal end of the femur were treated with a Van Nes tibial rotationplasty.  The survival rates were comparable with those for above-the-knee amputees and patients who had an endoprosthetic replacement.  The results of functional testing showed that these patients performed as well as those who had endoprosthetic replacement and better than those who had above-the-knee amputation.  Rotationplasty is therefore a favorable alternative to amputation or endoprosthetic replacement, either as a primary or as a salvage procedure.
Active specific immunotherapy in patients with melanoma. A clinical trial with mouse antiidiotypic monoclonal antibodies elicited with syngeneic anti-high-molecular-weight-melanoma-associated antigen monoclonal antibodies [published erratum appears in J Clin Invest 1991 Feb;87(2):757]  In two clinical trials the mouse antiidiotypic monoclonal antibody (MAb) MF11-30, which bears the internal image of human high-molecular-weight-melanoma-associated antigen (HMW-MAA) was administered by subcutaneous route without adjuvants to patients with stage IV malignant melanoma on day 0, 7, and 28.  Additional injections were administered if anti-antiidiotypic antibodies were not found or their titer decreased.  In the first phase I trial with 16 patients the initial dose was 0.5 mg per injection and escalated to 4 mg per injection.  Neither toxicity nor allergic reactions were observed despite the development of anti-mouse Ig antibodies.  Minor responses were observed in three patients.  In a second clinical trial MAb MF11-30 was administered to 21 patients at a dose of 2 mg per injection, since this dose had been shown in the initial study to be effective in inducing anti-antiidiotypic antibodies.  Two patients were inevaluable; in the remaining 19 patients, the average duration of treatment was 34 wk.  In this trial as well, neither toxicity nor allergic reactions were observed.  17 of the 19 immunized patients increased the levels of anti-mouse Ig antibodies and 16 developed antibodies that inhibit the binding of antiidiotypic MAb MF11-30 to the immunizing anti-HMW-MAA MAb 225.28.  One patient increased the level of anti-HMW-MAA antibodies.  One patient achieved a complete remission with disappearance of multiple abdominal lymph nodes for a duration of 95 wk.  Minor responses were observed in three patients.  These results suggest that mouse antiidiotypic MAb that bear the internal image of HMW-MAA may be useful reagents to implement active specific immunotherapy in patients with melanoma.
Polypoid melanoma: a virulent variant of nodular melanoma. Report of three cases and literature review.  We report the cases of three patients with polypoid melanoma.  In no case was there microscopic evidence of melanoma cell invasion below the papillary dermis.  In the polypoid variant of nodular melanoma, melanoma cells accumulate in large volume above the skin's surface.  This increase in tumor volume encourages dislodgment of melanoma cells that are carried to superficial lymphatic vessels without invading the reticular dermis; this feature differentiates polypoid melanoma from the nonpolypoid nodular variant.  Although polypoid melanoma is considered the most malignant form of melanoma, our findings, albeit limited to three cases, suggest that early diagnosis and prompt surgical excision may provide a favorable 5-year survival rate.
Photopheresis for the treatment of cutaneous T cell lymphoma.  We investigated the use of extracorporeal chemotherapy (photopheresis) in eight patients with cutaneous T cell lymphoma.  Initially described by Edelson et al.  for the treatment of erythrodermic cutaneous T cell lymphoma, we have expanded the treatment to include patients with extensive patch/plaque disease as well as tumor-stage disease.  Four of five patients with erythrodermic stage disease had either a complete or a partial clinical remission with photopheresis alone.  One patient with extensive patch/plaque disease continued to have a partial clinical remission of 7 months' duration with photopheresis alone.  Of the two patients with tumor-stage disease, one remained without evidence of clinical disease at 10 months with photopheresis alone, whereas the second patient had a partial clinical remission of 5 months with a combination of local radiation therapy followed by monthly photopheresis.  The skin biopsy specimen obtained from the patient with tumor-stage disease in complete clinical remission did not show cutaneous T cell lymphoma.  We conclude that photopheresis is an effective modality alone or in combination with adjunctive therapy for erythroderma, extensive patch/plaque disease, and some tumor-stage disease.
Excitatory amino acids in the developing brain: ontogeny, plasticity, and excitotoxicity.  Besides their role as neurotransmitters, excitatory amino acids (EAAs) in the developing brain are crucially involved in plasticity and excitotoxicity which are modified by their distinct ontogeny.  Along with incomplete neuritogenesis and synaptogenesis, presynaptic markers of the EAA system are immature in the developing brain; however, postsynaptic EAA system activities, particularly of the N-methyl-D-aspartate and quisqualate receptors, are transiently enhanced early in life.  This transient enhancement is presumably beneficial to the immature brain because physiologic activation of the EAA system plays a critical role in plasticity of early learning and morphogenesis.  At the same time, this transient hypersensitivity renders the immature brain vulnerable to pathologic excitation of the EAA system (excitotoxicity) as observed during neonatal hypoxia-ischemia.
Anencephaly: clinical determination of brain death and neuropathologic studies.  Twelve liveborn anencephalic infants were serially examined to determine if they would meet our clinical criteria for whole brain death within a 7-day period: Protocol 1 infants (6) received intensive care including intubation from birth; and Protocol 2 infants (6) received intensive care during the period in which death was imminent.  Brain death was determined by absence of brainstem function, including loss of all cranial nerve responses and sustained apnea (PCO2 greater than 60 torr) for 48 hours with confirmation of findings by an outside consulting child neurologist.  The initial examinations of these 12 infants revealed spontaneous movements and startle myoclonus (12), suck, root, and gag responses (7), increased tone (8), deep tendon reflexes (9), absent pupillary responses (9), absent oculocephalic and corneal responses (6), absent auditory/Moro responses (7), and nonvisualization of the optic nerve (8).  Mild depression of neurologic function occurred during the first several days of life; subsequently, the infants' responses were easier to elicit and more sustained.  Only 2 infants met the clinical criteria for brain death.  Neuropathologic findings indicated that observed complex motor responses were not based upon cortical activity because no infant had a normally-formed cerebrum.  Brainstem neuronal activity may have accounted for these motor responses in some patients but even at this level neurons were scanty or absent.  Our findings suggest that, although rare, clinical brain death can be determined in liveborn anencephalic infants; ophthalmologic and otologic developmental abnormalities may confound examination of cranial nerve function; and absence of cortical neurons supports the widely held opinion that these infants do not experience sensation.
ACTH therapy in infantile spasms: relationship between dose of ACTH and initial effect or long-term prognosis.  The relationship between the dose of ACTH and the initial effect was investigated in 41 children with infantile spasms.  More than 0.015 mg (0.6 IU)/kg/day of ACTH was needed for a good initial response of seizures and electroencephalographic abnormalities.  The relationship between the dose of ACTH and long-term prognosis was investigated in 29 patients.  There was no relationship between the daily or total ACTH dosage, provided the dose was greater than 0.015 mg (0.6 IU)/kg/day, and the outcome of seizures and electroencephalographic abnormalities; however, ACTH 0.04-0.06 mg (1.6-2.4 IU)/kg/day and a total ACTH dose of 1.1-1.5 mg (44-60 IU)/kg resulted in better mental development than smaller doses of ACTH.  Side effects of ACTH increased with dosage.  Too small or too large a dose of ACTH does not lead to better mental development.  The proper dose of ACTH should be used with careful attention to potential side effects.
Gross motor patterns in children with cerebral palsy and spastic diplegia.  Rolling, sitting, and crawling patterns were motoscopically analyzed in 72 children with cerebral palsy and spastic diplegia; the relation between these patterns and the severity of the locomotive disability was studied.  In rolling, trunk rotation and elbow support were difficult for the most severely diplegic children.  When sitting, most patients had a between-heel sitting pattern in which the thighs were adducted and the knees were flexed.  When crawling, the reciprocal thigh movements were insufficient and accompanied by lateral bending of the trunk in many patients.  In the more impaired patients, the thighs supported the weight in flexion and did not move reciprocally.  Creeping on the elbows without reciprocal leg movements was demonstrated in the most severely affected children after 2 years of age.
Ethyl chloride and venepuncture pain: a comparison with intradermal lidocaine.  One hundred and twenty unpremedicated patients undergoing gynaecological surgery were randomly allocated to one of three equal treatment groups to assess the effectiveness of ethyl chloride in producing instant skin anaesthesia to prevent the pain of venepuncture from a 20 G cannula.  They received either no anaesthetic, 0.2 ml one per cent lidocaine plain intradermally or a ten-second spray of ethyl chloride at the cannulation site.  Ethyl chloride produced skin anaesthesia that significantly reduced the pain of venepuncture.  However, it was not as effective as intradermal lidocaine.  It had no effect on vein visualisation or ease of cannulation.  Ethyl chloride can be recommended as a method of producing instant skin anaesthesia.
Brain protection: physiological and pharmacological considerations. Part I: The physiology of brain injury.  Ischaemia, whether focal or global in nature, produces a sequence of intracellular events leading to increased cell permeability to water and ions including Ca++.  There is a loss of cellular integrity and function, with increased production of prostaglandins, free radicals, and acidosis with lactate accumulation.  These events may be exacerbated by glucose administration.  Pharmacological agents aimed at alleviating ischaemic injury could be directed at decreasing cerebral metabolic requirements for oxygen, improving flow to ischaemic areas, preventing Ca+(+)-induced injury, inhibition of free radical formation, lactate removal, inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis, and prevention of complement-mediated leukocyte aggregation.  Part I of this paper describes some of the pathophysiological events leading to ischaemic brain injury.  Part 2 of this paper will consider the current agents available for brain protection.
Myasthenia gravis.  Myasthenia Gravis is a disorder of neuromuscular function resulting from an immunologically based premature destruction of acetylcholine receptors.  The disease is characterized clinically by variable weakness accentuated by repetitive muscular activity and usually responding to the administration of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.  Myasthenia Gravis is a complex disease and requires understanding of the many facets of its natural history and immunological basis to ensure optimal individual patient management.  The long-term goal is control of the immunological imbalance; treatment regimens include thymectomy, corticosteroids, azathioprine, and plasmapheresis.  The common use of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors provides symptomatic relief during variable daily muscular activity.  Disability due to myasthenia gravis is to a large extent reversible and death is preventable.  Early recognition of myasthenia gravis and appropriate treatment are often rewarded by remission that may be permanent.
Dementia, depression, or grief? The differential diagnosis.  Depression, grief, and dementia are conditions frequently encountered among the community-living elderly.  This review offers a primary care perspective of the distinguishing features for each and discusses the special issues of managing the elderly.  Major depression in the elderly usually responds to antidepressant medication, whether the depression occurs alone (endogenous) or as a response to another condition (reactive).
Semantic deterioration in Alzheimer's: the patterns to expect.  Differentiating language changes between the normal aged and those in the early stages of dementia is never simple.  Knowing the differences and what to expect can aid in making this diagnosis.
Increased serotoninergic and noradrenergic activity in hepatic encephalopathy in rats with thioacetamide-induced acute liver failure.  Functional changes of various neurotransmitter systems have been implicated in the pathogenesis of hepatic encephalopathy.  In this study the role of brain monoaminergic neurotransmitter systems in hepatic encephalopathy was investigated in rats with thioacetamide-induced acute liver failure.  Concentrations of serotonin, dopamine, noradrenaline and of their metabolites 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, dihydroxyphenylalanine (following inhibition of dihydroxyphenylalanine-decarboxylase), dihydroxyphenylacetic acid, homovanillic acid and 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenyl-glycol, were measured in the cerebral cortex, striatum and hippocampus by high performance liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection.  In hepatic encephalopathy concentrations of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid were increased in all three brain areas (196%, 204% and 264% of saline-treated controls, p less than 0.01), and concentrations of serotonin were increased in the frontal cortex (121%, p less than 0.01).  In the frontal cortex and hippocampus of encephalopathic rats dopamine levels were increased (157% and 289%, p less than 0.05), and levels of noradrenaline (53% and 46%, p less than 0.05) were decreased associated with increased 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol levels (173% and 206%, p less than 0.05).  The extent of these changes correlated with the stage of hepatic encephalopathy.  In hepatic encephalopathy dihydroxyphenylalanine accumulation was increased in the hippocampus and unchanged in the cerebral cortex.  Dopamine, noradrenaline, dihydroxyphenylacetic acid and homovanillic acid concentrations were unchanged in the striatum.  The results of this study indicate that hepatic encephalopathy in thioacetamide-induced acute liver failure in rats is associated with neurochemical changes, suggesting an increased activity of the noradrenergic and serotoninergic neurotransmitter systems.
Prevalence and characteristics of multiple analgesic drug use in an elderly study group.  With few exceptions, use of multiple analgesic drugs achieves dubious increases in analgesia while placing elders at increased risk of the many potential adverse effects of analgesic drugs.  The potential for duplication of analgesic therapy among the elderly is great due to prevalent painful chronic conditions and the variety of prescription and nonprescription analgesic remedies available.  The prevalence of multiple analgesic product use and patterns of concurrent use of different analgesic categories was investigated in a geographically defined population of persons 65 years of age and older.  The demographic characteristics of users of multiple analgesic drug products were examined, as were their smoking status, alcohol use, lifetime history rates of major illnesses, physical functioning, pain experiences, memory performance, and depressive symptoms.  A substantial proportion of analgesic users reported taking multiple products in the preceding 2 weeks (14.4% of female and 10.5% of male analgesic users).  Men who reported pain in the preceding year were more likely to use multiple analgesic products.  Women who experienced pain or limited physical functioning, or who had higher depressive symptom scores or a life-time history of ulcers were most likely to use multiple analgesic products.  Thus, although some users of multiple analgesic products reported significant pain, several other factors were shown to be related to the phenomenon of multiple use.
Dementia: what to do.  Dementia is a syndrome of acquired intellectual deterioration that interferes with personal or social functioning.  Diagnosis requires historical information from the family and the mental status evaluation of orientation, recent memory, comprehension, calculation, and abstraction.  Most dementias create permanent, even progressive cognitive deterioration, yet there are some presentations for which remission exists.  Common reversible conditions include depression, drug toxicity, normal-pressure hydrocephalus, hypothyroidism, subdural hematoma, and neoplasm.  Screening laboratory studies consist of urinalysis, chemistry profile, blood count, thyroid survey, vitamin B12 and folate measurements, serology, chest roentgenogram, computerized tomographic scan of the head, electroencephalogram, and electrocardiogram.  Treatment focuses on potential reversibility, psychosocial issues, restoring deficits, and specific symptoms.
Acute and long-term changes in serum lipids after acute stroke.  We studied serum lipid profiles in 171 patients less than or equal to 48 hours after the onset of acute stroke and 3 months later.  The 83 patients suffering cerebral infarction had significantly higher serum concentrations of total cholesterol, low density lipoprotein-cholesterol, and apolipoprotein B and significantly lower serum concentrations of triglycerides and lipoprotein (a) less than or equal to 48 hours after ictus than 3 months later.  The lipid profiles of the 53 patients suffering lacunar infarction were similar on both occasions, the only significant differences being higher total cholesterol and low density lipoprotein-cholesterol concentrations less than or equal to 48 hours after ictus.  No significant changes were observed among the 35 patients suffering cerebral hemorrhage apart from a significantly higher concentration of high density lipoprotein3-cholesterol less than or equal to 48 hours after ictus.  Our study, with many patients classified according to stroke subtype, gives results different from those of previous studies with much fewer patients.  We conclude that in studies of serum lipid and lipoprotein concentrations as risk factors for cerebral infarction, comparing values obtained less than or equal to 48 hours after admission with control values may incorrectly identify certain lipid fractions as risk factors.
Beneficial effect of 1,3-butanediol on cerebral energy metabolism and edema following brain embolization in rats.  We assessed the effect of 1,3-butanediol on cerebral energy metabolism and edema after inducing multifocal brain infarcts in 108 rats by the intracarotid injection of 50-microns carbonized microspheres.  An ethanol dimer that induces systemic ketosis, 25 mmol/kg i.p.  butanediol was injected every 3 hours to produce a sustained increase in the plasma level of beta-hydroxybutyrate.  Treatment significantly attenuated ischemia-induced metabolic changes by increasing the concentrations of phosphocreatine, adenosine triphosphate, and glycogen and by reducing the concentrations of pyruvate and lactate.  Lactate concentration 2, 6, and 12 hours after embolization decreased by 13%, 44%, and 46%, respectively.  Brain water content increased from 78.63% in six unembolized rats to 80.93% in 12 saline-treated and 79.57% in seven butanediol-treated rats 12 hours after embolization.  (p less than 0.05).  The decrease in water content was associated with significant decreases in the concentrations of sodium and chloride.  The antiedema effect of butanediol could not be explained by an osmotic mechanism since equimolar doses of urea or ethanol were ineffective.  Our results support the hypothesis that the beneficial effect of butanediol is mediated through cerebral utilization of ketone bodies arising from butanediol metabolism, reducing the rate of glycolysis and the deleterious accumulation of lactic acid during ischemia.
Etiologic importance of the intimal flap of the external carotid artery in the development of postcarotid endarterectomy stroke.  A technically unsatisfactory end point (transition from the removed diseased plaque to normal distal intima) leading to an intimal flap of the external carotid artery has been identified as a source of perioperative stroke.  The mechanism involves thrombus formation with retrograde propagation of the thrombus and subsequent embolization of the internal carotid artery.  This report describes three cases illustrating this mechanism and methods of identification and correction.  This mechanism of postoperative stroke adds further justification for the routine use of intraoperative surveillance studies to document the technical result of endarterectomy involving the internal and external carotid arteries.  When an unsatisfactory end point is identified in the external carotid artery, it should be corrected with the same sense of concern as a similar finding in the internal carotid artery.
Frequency of three Hex A mutant alleles among Jewish and non-Jewish carriers identified in a Tay-Sachs screening program.  Mutations in the HEX A gene, encoding the alpha-subunit of beta-hexosaminidase A (Hex A), are the cause of Tay-Sachs disease as well as of juvenile, chronic, and adult GM2 gangliosidoses.  We have examined the distribution of three mutations--a 4-nucleotide insertion in exon 11, a G----C transversion at a 5' splice site in intron 12, and a 269Gly----Ser amino acid substitution in exon 7--among individuals enzymatically diagnosed as carriers of Hex A deficiency.  Mutation analysis included polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of the relevant regions of genomic DNA, followed by allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization; another test for heterozygosity of the exon 11 insertion was based on the formation of heteroduplex PCR fragments of low electrophoretic mobility.  The percentage distribution of the exon 11, intron 12, exon 7, and unidentified mutant alleles was 73:15:4:8 among 156 Jewish carriers of Hex A deficiency and 16:0:3:81 among 51 non-Jewish carriers.  Regardless of the mutation, the ancestral origin of the Jewish carriers was primarily eastern and (somewhat less often) central Europe, whereas for the non-Jewish carriers it was western Europe.  Because a twelfth of the Jewish carriers and four-fifths of the non-Jewish carriers of Hex A deficiency had mutant alleles other than the three common ones tested, enzyme-based tests cannot be replaced by DNA-based tests at the present time.  However, DNA-based tests for two-carrier couples could identify those at risk for the chronic/adult GM2 gangliosidoses rather than for infantile Tay-Sachs disease.
More than one mutant allele causes infantile Tay-Sachs disease in French-Canadians.  Two Tay-Sachs disease (TSD) patients of French-Canadian origin were shown by Myerowitz and Hogikyan to be homozygous for a 7.6-kb deletion mutation at the 5' end of the hexosaminidase A alpha-subunit gene.  In order to determine whether all French-Canadian TSD patients were homozygotes for the deletion allele and to assess the geographic origins of TSD in this population, we ascertained 12 TSD families of French-Canadian origin and screened for occurrence of mutations associated with infantile TSD.  DNA samples were obtained from 12 French-Canadian TSD families.  Samples were analyzed using polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) amplification followed by hybridization to allele-specific oligonucleotides (ASO) or by restriction analysis of PCR products.  In some cases Southern analysis of genomic DNA was performed.  Eighteen of the 22 independently segregating mutant chromosomes in this sample carried the 7.6-kb deletion mutation at the 5' end of the gene.  One chromosome carried the 4-nucleotide insertion in exon 11 (a "Jewish" mutation).  In this population no individuals were detected who had the substitution at the splice junction of exon 12 previously identified in Ashkenazi Jews.  One chromosome carried an undescribed B1 mutation; this allele came from a parent of non-French-Canadian origin.  Patients in three families carried TSD alleles different from any of the above mutations.  The 5' deletion mutation clusters in persons originating in southeastern Quebec (Gaspe) and adjacent counties of northern New Brunswick.
Auditory hallucinations and smaller superior temporal gyral volume in schizophrenia.  Recent neuropathologic investigations in schizophrenia report smaller volume of medial temporal lobe structures.  These findings are confirmed by preliminary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies.  Direct stimulation of lateral temporal lobe structures in the region of the superior temporal gyrus provokes hallucinations.  The authors' MRI study of young schizophrenic patients demonstrates smaller volume of the superior temporal gyrus (an auditory association area) and of the left amygdala.  Smaller size of the left superior temporal gyrus and left amygdala is not accounted for by smaller size of the overall brain or temporal lobe.  Shrinkage of the left superior temporal gyrus is strongly and selectively correlated with severity of auditory hallucinations.
A discriminant validity study of negative symptoms with a special focus on depression and antipsychotic medication.  If the construct validity of the negative symptom syndrome is to be established, the conceptual and operational overlap between negative symptoms and other syndromes such as depression and the effects of medication must be explained.  The author assessed 26 patients with schizophrenia and 21 patients without schizophrenia, most of whom had depression, at the end of an average 2-week drug washout period and after approximately 2 months of psychotropic medication administration.  Negative symptoms were remarkably consistent in patients with schizophrenia despite pharmacological intervention.  In contrast, the patients without schizophrenia manifested significant decreases in negative symptoms.
Depression in dementia of the Alzheimer type and in multi-infarct dementia.  The authors used the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression and a rating of depressed mood to investigate the prevalence of depression in 55 patients with Alzheimer's disease, 37 patients with multi-infarct dementia, and 30 nondemented comparison subjects.  The prevalence of depressed mood depended on the severity of dementia as measured by the Mini-Mental State examination and was significantly lower among patients in more severe stages of Alzheimer's disease but not among patients with severe multi-infarct dementia.
Resistance to d-tubocurarine in lower motor neuron injury is related to increased acetylcholine receptors at the neuromuscular junction   The hypothesis that lower motor neuron injury, with its associated proliferation of acetylcholine receptors (AChR), induces resistance to the neuromuscular effects of d-tubocurarine (dTC) was tested in the rat.  The left gastrocnemius was denervated by a 75-80% lesion of the sciatic nerve.  The effective dose for 95% twitch depression (ED95) was studied in the denervated gastrocnemius and compared to the contralateral undenervated and sham-injured (control) gastrocnemius muscles approximately 2 weeks after injury.  The AChR number was quantitated by the specific ligand 125I-alpha-bungarotoxin (125I-alpha-BT).  Plasma dTC concentrations, measured by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), were correlated to twitch tension during spontaneous recovery from neuromuscular blockade in the denervated animal.  The ED95 (mean +/- SE) of dTC for the denervated leg was significantly (P less than 0.05) higher (0.26 +/- 0.06 mg.kg-1) than contralateral (0.16 +/- 0.03) and sham-operated left (0.13 +/- 0.03) legs.  The twitch tension recovered to 50% of control twitch height at significantly (P less than 0.05) higher plasma dTC concentrations in the denervated (0.78 micrograms.ml-1) compared to contralateral (0.24 micrograms.ml-1) limb.  The AChR number was significantly increased in the denervated limb (1041 +/- 96 fmol.mg protein-1) compared to contralateral right (109 +/- 4) and control left limb (113 +/- 11).  There was a significant (P less than 0.05) positive correlation (R2 = 0.73) between ED95 and AChR number; that is, 73% of the variability in ED95 could be explained by changes in AChR.  This study, therefore, confirms the hypothesis that proliferation of AChR after nerve denervation results in resistance to the neuromuscular effects of dTC.
A prospective, double-blind study of metoclopramide hydrochloride for the control of migraine in the emergency department   STUDY OBJECTIVE: To determine the effectiveness of IV metoclopramide as sole therapy for relieving the pain of acute migraine in the emergency department.  DESIGN: Prospective study.  Fifty patients were divided randomly into subjects and placebo controls with blinding of the treating physician and the patient.  PARTICIPANTS: Patients presenting to the ED with migraine requiring parenteral treatment.  INTERVENTIONS: Subjects received 10 mg IV metoclopramide and controls received IV normal saline; patient assessment of relief was followed by means of a numerical scale.  MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Sixty-seven percent of subjects compared with 19% of controls had effective pain relief within one hour (P less than .001).  Subjects achieved mean relief scores of 2.46 compared with 1.69 for controls (P less than .02).  No significant side effects were observed.  CONCLUSION: IV metoclopramide as a single agent is effective and safe therapy for migraine in the ED.
Spectral electroretinography in thioridazine toxicity.  In three patients with thioridazine toxicity, the electroretinogram (ERG) to red light was found to be below the average normal range.  A significant increase in its amplitude appeared with cessation of therapy in two cases.  A further deterioration of the ERG amplitude to all stimulus conditions (white, blue, and red lights) occurred when the dose of the medication was increased in the third patient.
Auditory brain stem implant: effect of tumor size and preoperative hearing level on function.  The auditory brain stem implant is an investigational device designed to provide hearing sensations to patients without functioning auditory nerves.  We analyzed results from 17 implants in 15 patients to determine if tumor size or preoperative hearing level might be related to proper device function.  We found no significant correlation between preoperative hearing level or tumor size and device function.  We also found no significant correlation between preoperative hearing level and tumor size in these 15 patients.
Cholinergic deficiency and frontal dysfunction in Parkinson's disease.  To investigate the influence of central cholinergic deficit on cognitive function in Parkinson's disease (PD), we compared the neuropsychological performance of a group of 20 patients who were treated with anticholinergic drugs (mean daily dose, 10.2 mg) with that of a group of 20 patients who received no anticholinergics.  The two groups were matched for all the variables of parkinsonism and levodopa therapy.  At the dose used, there was no significant difference between the two groups of patients for intellectual, visuospatial, instrumental, and memory function.  In contrast, in the group that received anticholinergics severe impairment was observed on tests believed to assess frontal lobe function.  These results suggest that the lesion of the ascending cholinergic neurons, which has been demonstrated post mortem in PD, may play a role in the subcorticofrontal behavioral impairment of this disease.
Ubiquitin immunoreactivity in kuru plaques in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.  Cerebellar kuru plaques in 2 cases of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease were studied immunohistochemically.  Similar to cerebellar senile plaques in Alzheimer's disease, many kuru plaques contained ubiquitin-positive, tau-negative small granular elements, presumably representing dystrophic neurites.  Our results suggest that similar mechanisms are involved in neuritic changes in cerebellar plaques in Creutzfeldt-Jakob and Alzheimer's diseases despite differences of amyloid proteins in the plaques.
Vasoactive peptide release in the extracerebral circulation of humans during migraine headache.  The innervation of the cranial vessels by the trigeminal nerve, the trigeminovascular system, has recently been the subject of study in view of its possible role in the mediation of some aspects of migraine.  Since stimulation of the trigeminal ganglion in humans leads to facial pain and flushing and associated release of powerful neuropeptide vasodilator substances, their local release into the extracerebral circulation of humans was determined in patients who had either common or classic migraine.  Venous blood was sampled from both the external jugular and cubital fossa ipsilateral to the side of headache.  Plasma levels of neuropeptide Y, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, substance P, and calcitonin gene-related peptide were determined using sensitive radioimmunoassays for each peptide, and values for the cubital fossa and external jugular and a control population were compared.  A substantial elevation of the calcitonin gene-related peptide level in the external jugular but not the cubital fossa blood was seen in both classic and common migraine.  The increase seen in classic migraine was greater than that seen with common migraine.  The other peptides measured were unaltered.  This finding may have importance in the pathophysiology of migraine.
Slow release carbamazepine in treatment of poorly controlled seizures.  Thirty three children with poorly controlled epilepsy, and six new patients, were treated with slow release carbamazepine.  Twelve of the former had a reduction in the number of seizures of more than half, and 10 had fewer side effects.  Three of the new patients stopped having seizures.  Variations in plasma concentrations between doses was significantly less when patients took the slow release preparation (22%) compared with the standard preparation (41%).  Slow release carbamazepine may improve the conditions of children whose seizures are poorly controlled.
Electroencephalography should not be routine in the evaluation of syncope in adults   We reviewed the reports of all electroencephalograms obtained at the Nashville (Tenn) Veterans Administration Hospital from September 1987 to August 1989.  Seventy-three patients were referred for evaluation of syncope or near syncope.  Of these 73 patients, 10 (13.7%) had abnormal findings.  Twenty-six patients were referred for other complaints similar to syncope (ie, blackouts, loss of consciousness, falling out, passing out, and fainting).  Of these 26 patients, five (19.2%) had abnormal findings.  We reviewed the medical records of the patients with abnormal findings and found that the final diagnosis or treatment of the syncope was affected by electroencephalogram in only one patient.  These findings suggest that routine electroencephalography is not of significant value in the evaluation of syncope in adults.
Rehabilitation of chronic stroke patients: changes in functional performance.  Forty stroke patients who were at least one year post-onset completed a one-month intensive rehabilitation program.  The month before the program served as a control period.  During the program, patients received individual sessions in occupational and physical therapy four days a week, and they participated in group activities on the fifth day.  Therapy emphasized instruction in motor planning, balance and weight shift, and the use of adaptive equipment; these motor abilities were then practiced within real life situations.  The patients demonstrated significant improvement in the outcome measures of weight shift, balance, and ADL scores after the one-month rehabilitation program (weight shift: F = 16.1, p = .0001; balance: F = 6.26, p = .0007; ADL: F = 13.8, p = .0001).  They retained these new skills during a three-month follow-up period.
Childhood stroke after minor neck trauma: case report.  Cerebral infarction after minor trauma to the neck has rarely been reported.  A case is presented of a child with trauma to the vertebrobasilar artery resulting in stroke.  Computerized tomography scan and angiography results are presented.  Despite two subsequent, separate transient episodes of vertigo, the child had good functional recovery with complete restoration of language and cognitive function.  After 28 months, residual impairments identified were a mild right-sided ataxia and hemiparesis.
Apneic oxygenation in apnea tests for brain death. A controlled trial.  We performed a prospective controlled study of apneic oxygenation on 15 patients undergoing apnea tests for brain death.  All patients were preoxygenated with 100% oxygen at existing respirator settings.  During the 10-minute apnea tests, nine patients were given continuous apneic oxygenation by tracheal cannula.  The other six patients had tracheal tubes open to room air.  The patients given apneic oxygenation had little or no hypoxia by the end of the test.  The patients given room air during the test became hypoxic.  Many neurologists perform apnea tests with no oxygenation or with preoxygenation alone.  This is the first prospective controlled study (to our knowledge) of apneic oxygenation; it shows that preoxygenation alone does not prevent hypoxia during apnea tests for brain death.  We recommend that all apnea tests be performed with apneic oxygenation.
Geographic patterns of parkinsonism-dementia complex on Guam. 1956 through 1985.  Average annual age-adjusted incidence rates of parkinsonism-dementia complex were obtained for the 19 election districts of Guam from 1956 through 1985.  The highest rates were found in the southern and central districts, and the lowest rates were found in the northern and western districts.  Geographic and temporal patterns of incidence were associated with socioeconomic status but not with geochemical factors.  The risk of parkinsonism-dementia complex in susceptible sibships was much higher than that in the general population--even in districts with the highest incidence rates, but especially in districts with the lowest incidence rates.  Our evidence tends to support the hypothesis that multiple factors linked to cycad use play an important role in the cause of PDC.  Hypotheses related to metal exposure and simple genetic factors were unsatisfactory explanations for the epidemiologic patterns observed.
Racial differences in the anterior circulation in cerebrovascular disease. How much can be explained by risk factors?  The entry characteristics of 1367 patients enrolled into the Extracranial/Intracranial Bypass Study were examined to determine if site differences in intracranial and extracranial arterial lesions among racial groups could be explained by differences in risk factors.  Blacks were more often hypertensive, diabetic, or cigarette smokers, while whites had higher systolic blood pressure and hemoglobin values.  Orientals had the lowest prevalence of vascular risk factors.  Despite these differences in risk factors, multivariate analysis showed race to be an independent and strong predictor of the location of cerebrovascular lesions.  To our knowledge, this study is unique in documenting risk factors prospectively and systematically in three racial groups simultaneously.  Although generalization is limited by possible biases related to patient selection, the results affirm previous tentative conclusions about the role of race in determining the location of cerebrovascular disease.
The large striatocapsular infarct. A clinical and pathophysiological entity.  We examined 29 patients with strictly subcortical large striatocapsular infarctions.  Eight of them had aphasia or neglect.  All patients underwent transcranial Doppler ultrasonography or selective carotid angiography, magnetic resonance imaging, and single photon emission tomography for assessment of cerebral blood flow, blood volume, and cerebral perfusion reserve.  The signs were compatible with cortical territorial infarctions rather than lacunes.  On both magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomographic scans, the lesions corresponded to the territories of the medial and lateral group of the lenticulostriate arteries, Heubner's artery, or the anterior choroidal artery.  The infarctions were either due to cerebral embolization into the M1 segment of the middle cerebral artery or due to stenosis at the same site, ie, lesions that acutely and simultaneously occluded the orifices of the lenticulostriate or neighboring arteries.  Persistent occlusion of the middle cerebral arteries and a decrease of cortical regional cerebral blood flow were only found in patients with aphasia or neglect.  All patients without aphasia or neglect showed a rapid recanalization of the middle cerebral artery occlusion or a stenosis of the M1 segment and no cortical regional cerebral blood flow decrease.  Large striatocapsular infarctions occur due to occlusive disease of the middle cerebral artery (large-vessel disease) and not due to a disseminated in situ occlusion of the long penetrating arteries (small-vessel disease), as in lacunes.  Neuropsychological deficits can be explained by decreased cortical blood flow due to a persistent occlusive lesion of the middle cerebral artery.
Brain imaging abnormalities in mental disorders of late life.  Psychiatric inpatients with dementia (N = 61) or depression (N = 67) in late life were 2.6 times more likely to manifest magnetic resonance imaging abnormalities of the brain than were elderly controls (N = 44).  Controlling for the effects of age and gender, demented patients were distinguishable from controls by an increased prevalence of cortical atrophy and infarction, while depressed patients exhibited an increased prevalence of cortical infarctions and leukoencephalopathy.  Patients with dementia were distinguishable from those with major depression by an increased prevalence of cortical atrophy.  These results indicate that major depression in late life, like dementia, is associated with a remarkable increase in overt pathologic changes in the brain.
Adjuvant chemotherapy for primary lymphoma of the central nervous system.  Ten immunocompetent patients with primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the central nervous system were treated by the neuro-oncology service at the University of California at San Francisco (UCSF).  After undergoing surgery for biopsy or removal of their tumors, these patients (group 1) received irradiation with hydroxyurea followed by adjuvant chemotherapy with the combination of procarbazine, lomustine (CCNU), and vincristine.  The outcome of treatment in this group was compared with that in three other groups of patients with primary CNS lymphoma: patients treated at the UCSF Cancer Research Institute who underwent surgery and radiation therapy (RT) (group 2); patients described in the literature who had surgery and RT (group 3); or patients described in the literature who had surgery, RT, and chemotherapy (group 4).  Median and quartile survival times were greater in patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy (group 1, 30 and 50 months; group 4, 20 and 25 months) than in patients who did not receive chemotherapy after RT (group 2, 13 and 20 months; group 3, 15 and 24 months).  These results suggest that adjuvant chemotherapy is useful in the treatment of primary CNS lymphoma.
Epidural hematoma: an unusual presentation.  The authors present a patient with a traumatic epidural hematoma who complained only of headache and presented to the emergency department 48 hours after a fall.  Mental status and neurological examination were normal.  This delayed presentation is more commonly seen when a subdural hematoma is present but may result from epidural bleeding.  Delayed formation of a traumatic epidural hematoma may occur when the following are present: elevated intracranial pressure, hypovolemic shock, a concomitant mass lesion, coagulopathy, bleeding from dural or diploic veins, a dural sinus laceration, a traumatic pseudoaneurysm, or an arteriovenous fistula.  Although criteria for computed tomography of patients with head injuries remain variable in the literature, delayed presentation of epidural bleeding must be considered in the differential diagnosis of posttraumatic headache irregardless of the time interval or neurological presentation.
Effect of flumazenil on midazolam-induced amnesia.  We have studied the effect of i.v.  flumazenil 0.01 mg kg-1 on the amnesia and sedation caused by midazolam 2 mg and 5 mg i.v.  in volunteers in order to determine the relationship between the actions of the antagonist on these two effects.  Midazolam caused dose-dependent central neural depression as assessed by critical flicker fusion frequency, and dose-dependent amnesia for word cards.  In subjects given flumazenil 5 min after administration of midazolam, fusion frequency readings and memory were restored to levels comparable to those before midazolam administration.  These two effects of flumazenil were similar in time course and extent, suggesting that they share the same mechanism of action.  Flumazenil given alone had no effect on memory.  The study has demonstrated anterograde amnesia following benzodiazepine administration and antagonism by flumazenil.  There was neither retrograde amnesia nor retrograde antagonism of amnesia.
Double-blind comparison of topical lignocaine-prilocaine cream (EMLA) and lignocaine infiltration for arterial cannulation in adults.  In a double-blind, double-dummy study, the efficacy of topical 5% EMLA cream was compared with that of lignocaine infiltration in alleviating the pain of arterial cannulation.  Forty unpremedicated adults were allocated randomly to four groups to receive EMLA cream alone, EMLA and 0.9% saline infiltration, EMLA and 1% lignocaine infiltration or placebo cream and 1% lignocaine infiltration.  Following arterial cannulation, pain was assessed by the patient using a visual analogue score and by an independent observer using a four-category verbal rating score.  Significantly lower pain scores were observed in all patients receiving EMLA compared with those receiving placebo cream and lignocaine infiltration by both patient (P less than 0.01) and observer (P less than 0.001) assessments.  There were no significant differences between the three EMLA groups.
Cerebral effects of sevoflurane in the dog: comparison with isoflurane and enflurane.  The cerebral effects of sevoflurane were compared in dogs with those of enflurane and isoflurane.  Initially, the minimum alveolar concentrations (MAC) of sevoflurane and enflurane were determined and the electroencephalographic (EEG) responses to increasing doses of sevoflurane (1.5, 2.0 and 2.5 MAC) or enflurane (1.5 and 2.0 MAC) in unparalysed animals were examined.  Administration of sevoflurane was not associated with seizure activity at any concentration either during normocapnia (PaCO2 5.3 kPa) or hypocapnia (PaCO2 2.7 kPa), even in the presence of intense auditory stimuli.  All dogs anaesthetized with enflurane demonstrated sustained EEG and motor evidence of seizure activity induced by auditory stimuli at concentrations of enflurane greater than 1 MAC, particularly during hypocapnia.  In a separate group of dogs, the effects of increasing concentrations of sevoflurane and isoflurane (0.5, 1.5 and 2.15 MAC) were compared directly on arterial pressure, cardiac output and heart rate, cerebral blood flow and the cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen (CMRO2) using the venous outflow technique.  Sevoflurane, in common with isoflurane, had minimal effects on cerebral blood flow at the concentrations studied, but significantly reduced the CMRO2 at end-tidal concentrations sufficient to produce a burst suppression pattern on the EEG (approximately 2.15 MAC).  Both sevoflurane and isoflurane significantly decreased arterial pressure in a dose-dependent manner, but neither drug significantly altered cardiac output.
Does primary fibromyalgia exist?   Twenty-one of 25 consecutive primary fibromyalgia or fibrositis patients, identified during a 5-year period in a tertiary care day-ward for pain syndromes, were re-examined.  Fifteen fulfilled criteria for fibromyalgia but unexpectedly, all cases had either psychiatric disturbance or thyroid dysfunction.  Of the four patients not seen at follow-up, two had developed neurological diseases, another rheumatoid arthritis and one other hypothyroidism.  Thus, after 5 years no patient fulfilled the criteria for primary fibromyalgia.  Women occupied as manual workers were over-represented.  Most patients reported beneficial effects of physiotherapy.  None of the patients has been able to return to full time work.
A randomized comparison of manipulation of the fractured nose under local and general anaesthesia.  Reduction of simple nasal fractures may be performed under local or general anaesthesia: the latter is by far the most popular method in Britain, though why is hard to define.  We have attempted to compare the 2 approaches by means of a randomized, prospective trial.  Fifty consecutive, adult patients with radiologically proved fractures of the nasal bones were randomized to a local or general anaesthesia group and underwent manipulation with Asch's and Walsham's forceps between 7 and 15 days post-injury.  Analysis of results at 4 h and 8 weeks post-operatively showed no significant benefit conferred by fracture reduction under general anaesthesia as opposed to local anaesthesia with respect to post-operative airway patency or cosmesis.  It is suggested that significant benefits can be obtained in terms of patient convenience and cost effectiveness if nasal fractures are reduced under local anaesthesia as an outpatient procedure.
Patellar resurfacing in total knee arthroplasty.  Technical errors in patellar resurfacing at the time of total knee arthroplasty (TKA) are responsible for many of the complications that affect the patellofemoral joint.  Instability, patellar fracture, and wear of metal-backed patellar implants are significantly affected by errors of patellar resurfacing.  A review of 50 TKAs using a condylar prosthesis and a standardized technique for patellar resurfacing was performed to evaluate the accuracy of the technique.  The patients were evaluated at a mean of 2.5 years (range, two to five years) after surgery.  The Hospital for Special Surgery Knee Score improved from a preoperative mean of 56 to 92 at the last evaluation.  The Hospital for Special Surgery Knee Scores were excellent in 92% and good in 8%.  The Knee Society Knee Score improved from a preoperative mean of 28 for pain and 49 for function to a last evaluation mean of 96 for pain and 85 for function.  None of the patients had symptoms referable to the patellofemoral joint.  There were no patellar fractures, dislocations, or instances of implant loosening of the patella.  Roentgenograms revealed nine asymmetrically resurfaced patellae and five tilted patellae.  There were no patellar subluxations.  Patellar thickness was maintained at the preoperative level of 21 mm.  Joint-line height was elevated 1 mm.  The patellar height was decreased 2 mm from the preoperative height.  Using a standard technique, satisfactory clinical results can be achieved, but minor errors in resurfacing and alignment will still occur.
Total knee arthroplasty fixation. Comparison of the early results of paired cemented versus uncemented porous coated anatomic knee prostheses.  The results of 18 matched pairs of Porous Coated Anatomic knee prostheses were studied to compare the early clinical and functional performance of cemented versus uncemented fixation with an average five-year follow-up period for both.  The knee score improved from a preoperative average of 35 points to a postoperative average of 90 points in the cemented group, and from 38 points to 93 points in the uncemented group.  In particular, the individual pain scores and the range-of-motion values were well matched at the three-, six-, and 12-month follow-up visits and showed a steady improvement.  Subjectively, all patients were pleased with the results of surgery; one-third preferred the cemented side, one-third preferred the uncemented side, and one-third found no difference in the performance of either knee.  The clinical and functional performance of knee prostheses in patients who had one cemented knee and one uncemented knee were comparable and possibly unrelated to the type of fixation method.
Cemented and ingrowth fixation of the Miller-Galante prosthesis. Clinical and roentgenographic comparison after three- to six-year follow-up studies.  One hundred thirty-nine cemented and 132 cementless Miller-Galante total knee prostheses were followed between three and six years (average, 43-44 months).  The fixation technique was based on patient age, bone quality, and ability to delay full-weight bearing.  Clinical follow-up studies were possible on 116 cemented knees.  Fifteen knees were lost because of death before the three-year follow-up study, and eight knees required component removal.  One hundred twenty-three cementless knees were available for clinical follow-up studies; there were three deaths, and six failures required component removal.  No cemented failure was due to fixation, and three cementless failures were due to lack of tibial ingrowth in two and pain of undetermined etiology in one.  Preoperative knee scores were slightly significant with cemented knees averaging 48 points and cementless knees averaging 52 points.  A similar significant difference was maintained at the final follow-up study.  No significant differences were noted for pain, limp, or support scores.  Average range of motion was similar in the two groups.  Radiolucent lines about the femoral component were rare.  Cementless tibial radiolucencies were partial in up to 20% of examined zones, and complete tibial tray radiolucency was seen in only three patients.  No correlation between radiolucency and knee scores was seen.
Anatomical, physiological, and theoretical basis for the antiepileptic effect of vagus nerve stimulation.  The vagus is a mixed nerve carrying somatic and visceral afferents and efferents.  The majority of vagal nerve fibers are visceral afferents and have a wide distribution throughout the central nervous system (CNS) either monosynaptically or via the nucleus of the solitary tract.  Besides activation of well-defined reflexes, vagal stimulation produces evoked potentials recorded from the cerebral cortex, the hippocampus, the thalamus, and the cerebellum.  Activation of vagal afferents can depress monosynaptic reflexes, decrease the activity of spinothalamic neurons, and increase pain threshold.  Depending on the stimulation parameters, vagal afferent stimulation in experimental animals can produce electroencephalographic (EEG) synchronization or desynchronization and has been shown to affect sleep states.  The desychronization of the EEG appears to depend on activation of afferent fibers that have conduction velocities of less than or equal to 15 m/s.  Vagal afferent stimulation can also influence the activity of interictal cortical spikes produced by topical strychnine application, and either attenuate or stop seizures produced by pentylenetetrazol, 3-mercaptoproprionic acid, maximal electroshock, and topical alumina gel.  The mechanisms for the antiepileptic effects of vagal stimulation are not fully understood but probably relate to effects on the reticular activating system.  The vagus provides an easily accessible, peripheral route to modulate CNS function.
Feasibility and safety of vagal stimulation in monkey model.  The feasibility, safety, and preliminary effects of chronic vagal stimulation were studied in an aluminagel monkey model.  Pilot studies to perfect the equipment, determine stimulation thresholds, and insure the comfort and safety of the animals preceded this study.  Four monkeys were equipped with an indwelling, 2-electrode cuff (titanium bands spaced 7 mm apart; silicone encased; 1.5 cm total length) in contact around the right vagus nerve; avoidance of the cardiac branch was confirmed by electrocardiograms.  After postsurgical recovery, the intact and awake animals received constant-current stimulation (5 mA; 83 Hz, 143 Hz, or 50-250 Hz randomly; 0.5-ms pulse width) at the onset of every spontaneous seizure for the duration of the seizure or every 3 h for 40 s if stimulation had not occurred in the preceding hour.  Stimulation periods of 2-6 weeks, with differing levels of stimulation, were preceded and followed by at least a 2-week baseline period of no stimulation.  During the stimulation periods, the seizure rate decreased to zero in two monkeys and the interseizure intervals became invariable in the remaining two monkeys.  These effects carried over temporarily into the poststimulation baseline periods.  Vagal stimulation had no consistent effects on seizure severity or EEG interictal spikes.  Histological studies of six vagus nerves were unable to separate electrode cuff damage from any direct effects stimulation may have had on the nerves.  Although it appears that chronic vagal stimulation is feasible and that epileptogenic processes are influenced, the safety and efficacy of the procedure are still in question.
An implantable neurocybernetic prosthesis system.  The neurocybernetic prosthesis (Cyberonics, Inc.) is an implantable, multiprogrammable pulse generator that delivers constant current electrical signals to the vagus nerve for the purpose of reducing the frequency and/or severity of epileptic seizures.  The device is implanted in a subcutaneous chest pocket just below the clavicle, similar to cardiac pacemaker placement.  The stimulation signal is transmitted from the prosthesis to the vagus nerve through a stimulation lead.  The prosthesis can be programmed using any IBM-compatible personal computer with programming software and a programming wand.  The electrodes used in the first group of patients were found to break at an unacceptable rate.  Design modifications appear to have resolved this problem.
Surgical technique for implantation of the neurocybernetic prosthesis.  The surgical technique for the implantation of the neurocybernetic prosthesis is described in detail.  This procedure is straightforward and is easily carried out by surgeons familiar with carotid surgery.
Efficacy and safety of vagus nerve stimulation in patients with complex partial seizures.  A clinical trial of chronic intermittent vagal stimulation in five patients suggests that the procedure may be safe and effective as adjunctive treatment of medically intractable seizures of partial onset.  Patients tolerated well the implantation of the neurocybernetic prosthesis and the vagal stimulation without serious physiological or lifestyle changes.  Stimulation of the vagus nerve either reduced the seizure frequency or decreased the duration or intensity of seizures.  Adverse side effects were limited to a tingling sensation in the throat and hoarseness during stimulation.  A major complication was mechanical interruption of the wire-electrode circuitry, with consequent cessation of stimulation.  The small number of patients and the relatively short follow-up period make this a pilot study, but the results are promising.
Vagus nerve stimulation in humans: neurophysiological studies and electrophysiological monitoring.  Evidence from studies of experimental animals indicates that electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve alters behavioral and electrographic seizure activity.  We report on effects of electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve in five patients with medically intractable seizures as part of a clinical trial of chronic vagal stimulation for control of epilepsy.  The mechanism of action of the vagal antiepileptic effect is unknown, and it is hoped that analysis of electrophysiological effects of vagal nerve stimulation will help elucidate which brain areas are affected.  Stimulation of the left vagus nerve in the neck was accomplished with a programmable implanted stimulator.  Effects of stimulus amplitude, duration, and rate were studied.  Noncephalic reference recording of the vagus-nerve-evoked potential showed some unusual properties: a scalp negative component occurred with latency of 12 ms, very high amplitude (up to 60 microV), and widespread scalp distribution.  Field distribution studies indicate that this potential is generated in the neck, in the region of the stimulating electrodes.  Muscle paralysis confirms this observation.  Stimulation at various frequencies had no noticeable effect on electroencephalographic (EEG) activity regardless of whether the patient was under general anesthesia, awake, or asleep.
Effects of vagal stimulation on experimentally induced seizures in rats.  Repetitive stimulation of the vagus nerve inhibits chemically induced seizures in dogs.  We report here the results and conclusions from studies designed to answer some of the immediate questions raised by this finding.  (1) Maximal stimulation of vagal C fibers at frequencies greater than 4 Hz prevents or reduces chemically and electrically induced seizures in young male rats.  (2) Antiepileptic potency is directly related to the fraction of vagal C fibers stimulated.  (3) Vagal stimulation shortens but does not shut down a chemical seizure once it has begun.  (4) In rats, optimal stimulus frequency is approximately 10-20 Hz; duration of stimulus, 0.5-1 ms; and stimulus strength, 0.2-0.5 mA/mm2 of nerve cross-section.  These results, when taken together with similar results obtained from dogs, monkeys, and humans, strongly suggest that periodic stimulation of the vagus nerve using appropriate stimulation parameters is a powerful method for preventing seizures.  The data from the literature suggest that the antiepileptic actions of vagal stimulation are largely mediated by widespread release of GABA and glycine in the brainstem and cerebral cortex.  The probable pathway is via projections from the nucleus of the solitary tract to the reticular formation and thence by diffuse projections to the cortex and other areas.  Intermittent vagal stimulation has the potentiality of reducing the number and/or the intensity of seizures in patients with intractable epilepsy.  These results indicate that feasibility studies in humans should be continued and expanded.
The epilepsies: clinical implications of the international classification.  From the earliest days of neurology, the classification of epileptic seizures into those generalized from the beginning and those with a definable localization in the cortex from the onset has added to knowledge about the function of the nervous system.  Further elaboration of the classification of seizures into those localized to the six-layered isocortex and those whose elaboration involves regions of the brain involved with consciousness and memory has provided the basic focus for the burgeoning subspecialty of epilepsy surgery.  It is increasingly apparent that the etiology of a seizure disorder is of at least equal or of greater significance than the nature of the seizures it spawns and is the product not only of localization in the nervous system but also of causative factors with implications reaching into areas of genetics, higher cortical function, and intelligence.  The prognosis concerning the outcome of the epilepsy under consideration is based on all of these facets.  This pathophysiological substratum, of which the seizure is only the presenting symptom, constitutes the epilepsy or epileptic syndrome on which the formulation of a rational treatment plan is based.
Transient hyperprolactinemia is associated with a midcycle luteinizing hormone surge.  This study demonstrates that LH surge cycles in IVF patients were associated with significantly higher serum PRL concentrations than cycles in which a spontaneous LH surge did not occur.  Our findings support the hypothesis of concomitant LH and PRL release at the time of the midcycle gonadotropin surge, as well as that of estrogen sensitization of pituitary lactotropes, and suggest a possible mechanism for transient midcycle hyperprolactinemia.
Local anesthesia for neonatal circumcisions: are family practice residents likely to use it?  Dorsal penile nerve block with lidocaine (DPNB) is a local anesthetic technique for neonatal circumcision which is both effective and consistent with ethical concerns for infant welfare.  As such, it should be included in training programs that prepare residents to care for newborns.  To assess the current level of DPNB use by residents in a family practice training program and to identify attitudes and other factors that relate to use, a survey was sent to 127 residents in the Department of Family Practice and Community Health, University of Minnesota.  Of the 101 respondents, 55% had used DPNB, and 17% could be characterized as high users, employing the technique for over one half of the circumcisions they performed.  Residents with comprehensive understanding of the newborn's capacity to feel pain were more likely to be using DPNB than their less well-informed counterparts.  Four factors were identified as predicting use: cooperation of nursery staff for the procedure, accessibility of instruction in PNB technique, belief that PNB is effective in reducing infant pain, and likelihood of parents giving consent for PNB.  These results suggest strategies which may be implemented by family practice educators who wish to promote the principles and techniques of DPNB.
Serious migraine: a study of some epidemiological aspects.  Data are scant concerning some epidemiological aspects of those severe headaches which cause serious personal and economic morbidity.  Our purpose was to study the incidence and other epidemiological features of patients suffering from severe migraine exacerbations, in an unselected population.  The 64 patients who suffered from severe migraine bouts represented 10.5% of all the new walk-in neurological consultations in the area covered in this study.  70% of these patients were between 10 and 39 years old.  Although females clearly predominated in all ages after fifteen, below this age there was a slight male predominance.  The calculated incidence of serious migraine exacerbations was 90 per 100,000 people per year, the corrected incidence for females being 143/100,000 and for males 37/100,000.  The highest incidence for females was in 15-19 year-olds (377/100,000) and for males in 10-14 year-olds (166/100,000).  Our data seem to confirm the periodic nature of this condition since in 80% of patients the migraine bouts (ie: groups of attacks) lasted between two and nine months.  Also they support the reported existence of genetic and hormonal factors in the susceptibility to migraine exacerbations.  Our results may help in planning the public health aspect of migraine and add some light to the natural history of this common condition.
Platelet monoamine oxidase activity in female migraine patients.  Platelet monoamine oxidase activity (MAO) in a group (n = 17) of white, female migraineurs during an acute migraine attack was similar to both the values obtained for the same group of patients two to three weeks after the headache episode (pain-free period) and to the results obtained for a group (n = 18) of sex and race-matched, age-comparable, drug-free healthy volunteers (blind study; substrate p-tyramine, 38.7 +/- 5.7, 41.9 +/- 8.8 and 43.0 +/- 3.4 or p-methoxybenzylamine, 178.9 +/- 11.3, 177.2 +/- 6.9 and 181.0 +/- 9.7 nmole/hr/10(9) platelets +/- SD respectively).  With each patient serving as its own control, MAO activity during the migraine episode and when pain-free failed to show a significant trend.  Neither a number of other medical conditions nor the use of several medications appeared to significantly influence our results.  The present work, while dealing only with a small but well defined patient population, argues against the possible usefulness of platelet MAO activity as a biological marker for migraine headaches.
A protocol for butalbital, aspirin and caffeine (BAC) detoxification in headache patients.  The abuse of the combination drug containing butalbital 50 mg, aspirin 325 mg and caffeine 40 mg (or BAC), is commonly recognized by headache specialists as causing headaches.  Despite this widespread problem, there is not a published treatment regimen for the BAC detoxification of patients.  I describe such a protocol which was used four times in three patients.  These patients fulfilled the diagnostic criteria of the IHS Headache Classification for headaches induced by chronic substance abuse (8.2) and analgesics abuse headache (8.2.2).  These patients took between 150 and 420 BAC/month for 2-15 years.  Two patients had previously undergone inpatient detoxification.  One patient unsuccessfully tried detoxification twice as an outpatient.  All patients were required to have psychological support prior to hospitalization for this protocol.  BAC was discontinued.  A pentobarbital challenge test corroborated butalbital dosage.  The patients were given phenobarbital and caffeine which were tapered over several days.  Dihydroergotamine (DHE) with metoclopramide was used (Raskin).  Propranolol 60 mg bid was started.  No narcotics were permitted.  After hospital discharge, patients were allowed to continue subcutaneous DHE, as needed.  One patient restarted BAC use after 8 months without it.  The other two patients were still BAC free 18 and 14 months after detoxification.
Dissociation between pain and autonomic disturbances in cluster headache.  The relationship between pain and autonomic disturbances in cluster headache was studied in 54 patients whose attack always recurred on the same side, and in 7 others whose attack had affected either side on different occasions.  In one of these seven patients, facial flushing and ocular sympathetic deficit was observed on the original side of headaches.  In most patients, the orbital region was warmer on the painful side but in three cases this region was cooler during and between attacks.  Lacrimation and rhinorrhoea were more common in severe attacks, and the temperature difference between the orbits increased with increasing severity of pain.  These findings support the view that certain autonomic disturbances in cluster headache are provoked by pain.  Residual autonomic dysfunction could influence autonomic activity during cluster headache.  If so, residual dysfunction on the pain-free side could explain the dissociation between autonomic disturbances and pain observed in a few cases.
A study of the seasonal variation of migraine.  Available evidence supports the contention that migraine involves a disturbance in serotonin function.  Several parameters of serotonin function in humans have been found to vary seasonally and may underlie the seasonal fluctuations observed in many clinical neuropsychiatric phenomena that are thought to involve serotonin dysfunction.  We therefore postulated that migraine headaches might also vary seasonally and examined the admissions to our hospital over a 20-year period with a primary diagnosis of migraine.  Peak admissions were found to occur most frequently in the spring for females in comparison to males (p less than or equal to 0.04, chi-square).  The implications of these findings are discussed.
Clinical characteristics of migraine and episodic tension-type headache in relation to old and new diagnostic criteria.  Eighty-one patients were diagnosed as having migraine, tension headache or both according to previously used criteria.  Then we performed a standardized interview to determine the frequency and severity of headache characteristics used in the new operational diagnostic criteria of the International Headache Society (IHS).  In every patient the original diagnosis fulfilled also the IHS criteria, but in 9 patients the criteria were only fulfilled in half or less of the attacks, and applying the IHS criteria they also achieved an additional diagnosis.  In one patient these attacks did not fulfill the pain criteria and in 8 (4 migraine, 4 tension headache) they did not fulfill the criteria for accompanying symptoms.  Overall the IHS criteria are sensitive and specific, but they may possibly be improved with regard to accompanying symptoms.  The present study suggests that recording of frequency and graded severity of characteristics using a headache diary may further improve the distinction between the different types of headache.
Fluctuation in timing of upper airway and chest wall inspiratory muscle activity in obstructive sleep apnea.  An imbalance in the amplitude of electrical activity of the upper airway and chest wall inspiratory muscles is associated with both collapse and reopening of the upper airway in obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).  The purpose of this study was to examine whether timing of the phasic activity of these inspiratory muscles also was associated with changes in upper airway caliber in OSA.  We hypothesized that activation of upper airway muscle phasic electrical activity before activation of the chest wall pump muscles would help preserve upper airway patency.  In contrast, we anticipated that the reversal of this pattern with delayed activation of upper airway inspiratory muscles would be associated with upper airway narrowing or collapse.  Therefore the timing and amplitude of midline transmandibular and costal margin moving time average (MTA) electromyogram (EMG) signals were analyzed from 58 apnea cycles in stage 2 sleep in six OSA patients.  In 86% of the postapnea breaths analyzed the upper airway MTA peak activity preceded the chest wall peak activity.  In 86% of the obstructed respiratory efforts the upper airway MTA peak activity followed the chest wall peak activity.  The onset of phasic electrical activity followed this same pattern.  During inspiratory efforts when phasic inspiratory EMG amplitude did not change from preapnea to apnea, the timing changes noted above occurred.  Even within breaths the relative timing of the upper airway and chest wall electrical activities was closely associated with changes in the pressure-flow relationship.  We conclude that the relative timing of inspiratory activity of the upper airway and chest wall inspiratory muscles fluctuates during sleep in OSA.
Rat soleus muscle ultrastructure after hindlimb suspension.  The aim of the present investigation was to determine, by quantitative electron microscopy, the effects of a 5-wk tail-suspension period on rat soleus muscle ultrastructure.  A marked decline (-60%) in muscle mass occurred.  The mean fiber cross-sectional area decreased to a greater extent (-75%) than the capillary-to-fiber ratio (-37%), leading to a higher capillary density (+148%) after hypokinesia.  The total mitochondrial volume density remained unchanged, whereas the volume density of myofibrils was slightly but significantly reduced (-6%).  A shift from subsarcolemmal to interfibrillar mitochondria occurred.  Interfibrillar mitochondrial volume density was highest near the fiber border and decreased toward the fiber center.  An increase in volume density of satellite cells suggested muscle regenerative events.  Soleus atrophy with tail suspension greatly decreases the muscular volume but leaves the ultrastructural composition of muscle fibers relatively unaffected.
Cognitive function testing in comprehensive geriatric assessment. A comparison of cognitive test performance in residential and clinic settings.  Tests of cognitive function are frequently used in geriatric assessment, but the effect of test setting has rarely been explored.  To determine the effect of testing site on the performance of elderly patients undergoing a comprehensive geriatric assessment, we administered the Mini-Mental State Exam to 116 geriatric patients in the clinic and at their residence.  Their cognitive abilities varied from normal to severely impaired.  The patients' scores were 1.5 +/- 3.6 (mean +/- SD) higher at their residence.  The clinical importance of a difference in score of 1.5 is not clear.  For this reason a second analysis was performed in which a difference in scores of five points or greater between settings was considered clinically meaningful.  Twenty-five percent (29 of 116) differed by five points or more.  Of these 29 patients, 22 (76%) tested better in the residential setting.  These differences were statistically significant (P = .001).  We conclude that the testing site may affect test performance and that in-home assessment may reveal the optimal cognitive function of geriatric patients.
Foci of increased T2 signal intensity in MR images of healthy elderly subjects. A follow-up study.  An 18-month follow-up study was conducted on 26 healthy elderly subjects with and without foci of increased T2 signal intensity on MR imaging.  The subjects did not differ with respect to health status or cognitive performance as measured by the Cognitive Subscale of the Cambridge Mental Disorders of the Elderly Examination and the Mini Mental State Examination at follow-up.  There was a significant decline in performance on the Digit Symbol Substitution Test in subjects who had evidence of T2 foci compared to the performance of subjects without T2 foci.  This may indicate that the presence of T2 foci is correlated with subtle difficulties in learning and memory.
Decline in the prevalence of childhood deafness in the Jewish population of Jerusalem: ethnic and genetic aspects.  A longitudinal study was performed on 147 Jewish children with bilaterally sensorineural hearing loss of moderately severe to profound degree, born in Jerusalem during the eighteen years 1968-85.  The prevalence rate of these children declined during the years 1977-85, and at the same time the rate of consanguinity of their parents decreased; this decline was more evident in the genetic group among children with non-Ashkenazi ethnic origin.  No such decline was found among the Ashkenazi children and no consanguinity among parents of these children was recorded.  Our study supports the assumption that restriction of consanguineous matings may affect the prevalence of genetic deafness in children in a well-defined population.  We have tried to remain unbiased and concede certain shortcomings in our present study.
Compliance, reliability, and validity of self-monitoring for physical disturbances of Parkinson's disease. The Parkinson's Symptom Diary.  Previous clinical research in Parkinson's disease has recognized the value of self-monitoring procedures in which patients observe and record the frequency and severity of their own symptoms as these occur within the patient's social and work environment.  We discuss issues of methodology and report a study of compliance, test-retest reliability, and validity with a new self-monitoring instrument, the Parkinson's Symptom Diary.  Two recordings of frequency (loss of balance, hesitation-freezing) and two ratings of severity (tremor, difficulty walking) were made four times daily for one week by patients (N = 73) who were without apparent loss of cognitive or memory functions.  A total of 91% of the diaries received (97% of requested) met strict compliance criteria so that independent sampling over days could be assumed.  Test-retest stability over one month was demonstrated for each score (all Spearman rho greater than .85) in a representative subsample of 28 patients.  Criterion validity was demonstrated for each score by an expected pattern of correlations with independently obtained observer ratings of the same or related indices of disease, and by comparison with Hoehn and Yahr disability stages.  By its simplicity, this self-assessment device can be an invaluable complement to traditional methods of clinical and laboratory assessment in the care and evaluation of Parkinson patients.
Untying the gordian knot: the genetics of Tourette syndrome.  A review of the current status of the genetics of Tourette syndrome is presented.  Over the course of the 104 years since Gilles de la Tourette described the syndrome that bears his name, a body of carefully collected, described, and analyzed data has produced a model of the genetics that implicates a single dominant gene that is variably penetrant in males and females.  Moreover, the locus of action of this gene is most likely in the dopaminergic system of the midbrain.  A systematic search for this gene using recombinant DNA techniques is under way.
Fatal or severely disabling cerebral infarction during hospitalization for stroke or transient ischemic attack.  Six (1%) of 578 patients admitted for cerebral infarction or transient ischemic attack (TIA) suffered a fatal or severely disabling in-hospital cerebral infarction following a period of stabilization or improvement lasting more than 1 day.  These infarctions were characterized by the sudden onset of stupor or coma and subsequent development of transtentorial herniation due to carotid or middle cerebral artery territory infarction, or widespread brain-stem infarction due to basilar occlusion.  Only one patient survived.  Four patients had large-vessel disease documented by Doppler, angiography, or at autopsy.  Each of these six infarcts occurred during the morning hours, 4-9 days after the initial event, 3-8 days after initiation of intravenous heparin, and within 4-8 h after intravenous heparin had been discontinued.  No coagulation abnormalities were documented.  We believe that these cases indicate that among patients admitted for cerebral infarction or TIA, fatal or severely disabling in-hospital cerebral infarction after a period of stabilization or improvement may occur in patients having an initially mild to moderate clinical deficit, that those suffering large artery disease may be at greater risk, and that there may be a relationship between heparin withdrawal and cerebral infarction in some patients.
Unusual blink reflex with four components in a patient with periodic ataxia.  Characteristic findings in blink reflex are reported in a 55-year-old female with periodic ataxia.  The blink reflexes on the side ipsilateral to the stimulation consisted of four components with latencies of 11, 21, 35 and 47 ms, instead of the usual two components seen in normal subjects.  On the contralateral side, the last three components were also present.  The second component was different from the normal R2 response in that its latency was shorter than normal and it did not habituate by stimulation at a rate of 10 Hz.  In addition, it was more affected by diazepam than the third or fourth components.  It is considered that R2 may have consisted of three components and that a shorter latency of the second component could be explained by facilitation.
Characterization of periventricular edema in normal-pressure hydrocephalus by measurement of water proton relaxation times.  The magnetic resonance longitudinal relaxation time (T1) and transverse relaxation time (T2) of the water proton of the periventricular white and cortical gray matter were measured for 17 control patients and 21 patients with suspected normal-pressure hydrocephalus (NPH).  Of the latter group, 14 showed good response to shunting (true-NPH group) and seven showed no response (false-NPH group).  In the true-NPH group, both the T1 and the T2 of the periventricular white matter were significantly prolonged compared to the control values, and slowly shortened after cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shunting.  The true-NPH group showed significantly longer T1 and T2 of the white matter than did the false-NPH group.  The T1 and T2 of the white matter were longer than those of the gray matter in this group, which was the reverse of the relationship observed in the control patients.  In the white matter of the false-NPH group, there was a significant prolongation of T1 only; no difference was seen in the T2 compared to control values.  There was no change in either T1 or T2 of this region after CSF shunting.  The false-NPH group showed no significant difference in either T1 or T2 between the white and the gray matter.  There was no difference in either T1 or T2 of the gray matter between the false-NPH and control groups or between preshunt and postshunt measurements in each patient group.  It is suggested that a distinction between true- and false-NPH, which cannot be made from the radiographic appearance alone, may be possible from measurement of relaxation times.  The mechanism of varied relaxation behavior between two entities may be explained by a difference in properties of the biological water and its environment.
Systems analysis of cerebrovascular pressure transmission: an observational study in head-injured patients.  In an observational study in head-injured patients, cerebrovascular pressure transmission was investigated using a systems analysis approach whereby the blood pressure (BP) waveform was used as a measure of an input stimulus to the cerebrovascular bed (CVB) and the intracranial pressure (ICP) waveform as the response to that stimulus.  The transfer function is a measure of how much pressure is transmitted through the CVB at a given frequency and is calculated using Fourier analysis of the pressure waveforms.  The transfer function allows quantification of the pressure transmission performance of the CVB, thus providing a basis for comparison between normal and abnormal function.  Fifteen hundred samples of ICP and BP waveforms were collected from 30 head-injured patients via microcomputer.  Off-line spectral analysis of the waveform database revealed four main classes of transfer function: those with an overall flat transfer function (curve type 1); those with an elevated low-frequency response (curve type 2); those with an elevated high-frequency response (curve type 3); and those exhibiting both an elevated low- and high-frequency response (curve type 4).  Curve types 2 and 4 were most often associated with raised ICP (greater than 20 mm Hg), whereas curve types 1 and 3 were most often affiliated with ICP less than 15 mm Hg.  Studies of this type may provide insight into the pathophysiology of the CVB and ultimately aid in the prediction and treatment of raised ICP.
Massive increases in extracellular potassium and the indiscriminate release of glutamate following concussive brain injury.  An increase in extracellular K+ concentration ([K+]c) of the rat hippocampus following fluid-percussion concussive brain injury was demonstrated with microdialysis.  The role of neuronal discharge was examined with in situ administration of 0.1 mM tetrodotoxin, a potent depressant of neuronal discharges, and of 0.5 to 20 mM cobalt, a blocker of Ca++ channels.  While a small short-lasting [K+]c increase (1.40- to 2.15-fold) was observed after a mild insult, a more pronounced longer-lasting increase (4.28- to 5.90-fold) was induced without overt morphological damage as the severity of injury rose above a certain threshold (unconscious for 200 to 250 seconds).  The small short-lasting increase was reduced with prior administration of tetrodotoxin but not with cobalt, indicating that neuronal discharges are the source of this increase.  In contrast, the larger longer-lasting increase was resistant to tetrodotoxin and partially dependent on Ca++, suggesting that neurotransmitter release is involved.  In order to test the hypothesis that the release of the excitatory amino acid neurotransmitter glutamate mediates this increase in [K+]c, the extracellular concentration of glutamate ([Glu]c) was measured along with [K+]c.  The results indicate that a relatively specific increase in [Glu]c (as compared with other amino acids) was induced concomitantly with the increase in [K+]c.  Furthermore, the in situ administration of 1 to 25 mM kynurenic acid, an excitatory amino acid antagonist, effectively attenuated the increase in [K+]c.  A dose-response curve suggested that a maximum effect of kynurenic acid is obtained at a concentration that substantially blocks all receptor subtypes of excitatory amino acids.  These data suggest that concussive brain injury causes a massive K+ flux which is likely to be related to an indiscriminate release of excitatory amino acids occurring immediately after brain injury.
Cerebrovascular and metabolic effects on the rat brain of focal Nd:YAG laser irradiation.  To investigate the effects of focal neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser irradiation (lambda = 1060 nm) on regional cerebral blood flow, cerebral protein synthesis, and blood-brain barrier permeability, the parietal brain surface of 44 rats was irradiated with a focused laser beam at a constant output energy of 30 J.  Survival times ranged from 5 minutes to 48 hours.  Laser irradiation immediately caused well-defined cortical coagulation necrosis.  Within 5 minutes after unilateral irradiation, 14C-iodoantipyrine autoradiographs demonstrated severely reduced blood flow to the irradiation site and perilesional neocortex, but a distinct reactive hyperemia in all other areas of the forebrain.  Apart from a persistent ischemic focus in the vicinity of the cortical coagulation necrosis, blood flow alterations in remote areas of the brain subsided within 3 hours after irradiation.  Autoradiographic assessment of 3H-tyrosine incorporation into brain proteins revealed rapid onset and prolonged duration of protein synthesis inhibition in perifocal morphologically intact cortical and subcortical structures.  Impairment of amino acid incorporation proved to be completely reversible within 48 hours.  Immunoautoradiographic visualization of extravasated plasma proteins using 3H-labeled rabbit anti-rat immunoglobulins-showed that, up to 1 hour after irradiation, immunoreactive proteins were confined to the neocortex at the irradiation site.  At 4 hours, vasogenic edema was present in the vicinity of the irradiation site and the subcortical white matter, and, at later stages (16 to 36 hours), also extended into the contralateral hemisphere.  Although this was followed by a gradual decrease in labeling intensity, resolution of edema was still not complete after 48 hours.  Analysis of sequential functional changes in conjunction with morphological alterations indicates that the evolution of morphological damage after laser irradiation does not correlate with the time course and spatial distribution of protein synthesis inhibition or vasogenic edema.  Although the central coagulation necrosis represents a direct effect of radiation, the final size of the laser-induced lesion is determined by a delayed colliquation necrosis due to persistent perifocal ischemia.  Extent and severity of ischemia in a zone with initial preservation of neuroglial cells can be explained by the optical properties of the Nd:YAG laser; extensive scattering of light within brain parenchyma associated with a high blood-to-brain absorption ratio selectively affects blood vessels outside the irradiation focus.
Long-term evaluation of hemiparkinsonian monkeys after adrenal autografting or cavitation alone.  Autografts of adrenal medulla were implanted into preformed cavities in the caudate nuclei of four rhesus monkeys with hemiparkinsonism induced by 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP).  Five other hemiparkinsonian monkeys underwent caudate cavitation, but received no tissue implant.  All of the animals had marked bradykinesia of the affected arm and stable apomorphine-induced turning before cavitation or implantation.  Moderate behavioral recovery was seen in all five monkeys with cavitation and two of the three monkey with long-term adrenal autografts (the fourth adrenal recipient was sacrificed 10 days after grafting).  The improvement occurred months after the procedure and was not as early or as complete as that seen after fetal dopaminergic grafts.  Surviving adrenal tissue was found only in the animal that showed no behavioral recovery.  The other two adrenal autograft recipients (with no surviving adrenal medulla) and all of the animals with cavitation had ingrowth of dopaminergic fibers from the area olfactoria and nucleus accumbens into the caudate, oriented toward the cavity.  These findings show that the mechanism of improvement after adrenal medullary implants for parkinsonism is not dopamine secretion by chromaffin cells, but may be related to the sprouted host fibers.  The results also indicate that the limited recovery after adrenal implants in parkinsonian patients may be a result of the cavitation, and not necessarily the result of tissue implantation.
Facial bone fracture associated with carotid-cavernous sinus fistula.  Out of 989 cases of facial bone fracture, ten patients had carotid-cavernous sinus fistulas (1.01%).  Their ages ranged from 25 to 48 years.  Seven were male and three female.  Two of the ten patients had lower third, three patients had middle third, three patients had upper third, and two patients had combined middle and lower third facial bone fractures.  The signs and symptoms of a fistula appeared from the first postinjury day up to 50 days after the injury (mean, 21 days).  Four patients had symptoms after operation for facial bone fracture.  Most fistulae were identified by arteriography before treatment.  Followup ranged from 1 year, 8 months, to 5 years, 9 months (mean, 2 years, 9 months).  One patient had a malocclusion.  Nine patients had complete resolution of their bruits.  Complications included unilateral complete visual loss (two), CSF rhinorrhea (two), and stroke in one of the two CSF rhinorrhea patients.  One patient expired due to a severe head injury, and there was one death from an unrelated cause.
Parathyroid hormone-related peptide in lactation and in umbilical cord blood.  Parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) is expressed in lactating rat mammary glands after suckling, as a result of increases in prolactin rather than suckling per se.  In addition, PTHrP produced in the fetal parathyroid glands and placenta may be responsible for stimulation of placental calcium transport.  In the current study, we used a radioimmunoassay for human PTHrP to measure levels of the peptide in (1) human breast milk, cow's milk, and two infant formulas; (2) sequential plasma samples in prepartum and postpartum lactating women; (3) women with pathologic hyperprolactinemia; and (4) human umbilical cord blood.  In normal subjects, plasma PTHrP levels ranged from less than 2 to 5 pmol/liter.  In contrast, human breast milk contained substantially increased levels of immunoreactive PTHrP.  Similar elevations were found in cow's milk and in one infant formula.  Column chromatography of breast milk demonstrated that PTHrP immunoreactivity included a region of adenylate cyclase stimulating activity, consistent with the presence of biologically active PTHrP.  Plasma prepartum PTHrP values did not differ from corresponding postpartum values in lactating women.  Women with hyperprolactinemia had a mean plasma PTHrP value in the high-normal range.  Umbilical cord blood had considerably suppressed parathyroid hormone values but PTHrP levels that were indistinguishable from those in normal human plasma.  Thus, PTHrP is present in high concentrations in breast milk but apparently does not gain access to the maternal circulation in significant amounts.  In addition, women with pathologic hyperprolactinemia seem not to have increased levels of circulating PTHrP.
Auditory-evoked responses in benign intracranial hypertension syndrome.  In this study, auditory brainstem-evoked responses were conducted on 28 patients with otologic symptoms (pulsatile tinnitus, hearing loss, aural fullness) secondary to benign intracranial hypertension syndrome.  Abnormalities consisting mainly of prolonged interpeak latencies were detected in one third of these patients.  It is speculated that the pathophysiologic mechanisms responsible for these auditory brainstem-evoked abnormalities are stretching-compression of the cochlear nerve and brainstem caused by the intracranial hypertension and/or primary edema of the same structures due to the benign intracranial hypertension syndrome itself.  Normalization or improvement was noticed in the majority of the patients after management.  Since the number of patients in this study is small, it is felt that the diagnostic and prognostic value of this test needs further evaluation.
The efficacy of brainstem auditory evoked potentials in acoustic tumor surgery.  As the identification of patients with small acoustic neuromas and salvageable hearing increases, intraoperative auditory nerve monitoring has been used increasingly in an attempt to improve the hearing preservation rate.  Far-field recordings obtained by brainstem auditory evoked potentials (BAEP), at times enhanced by electrocochleography, have become a standard method of intraoperative auditory nerve assessment.  To evaluate the usefulness of this monitoring technique, the hearing preservation results of a series of unmonitored acoustic tumor removals were compared to a series of patients monitored via the standard brainstem auditory evoked potentials.  With comparable average tumor sizes, 4 of 7 unmonitored patients had hearing preserved at preoperative levels compared to 4 of 9 monitored patients.  Neither preoperative BAEP assessments nor absolute tumor size were predictive of hearing preservation.  This report brings into question the effectiveness of far-field intraoperative BAEP monitoring during acoustic tumor resection and suggests that direct auditory nerve monitoring may be more appropriate.
Circulatory and thermal adjustments to prolonged exercise in paraplegic women.  The circulatory and thermal responses to 90 min of wheelchair ergometer exercise were examined in five wheelchair dependent (WD) women with low level spinal dysfunction and five able-bodied (AB) women who served as a comparison group.  Metabolic rate during exercise was 221 W for WD and 255 W for AB (P greater than 0.05).  Oral temperature (Tor), mean skin temperature (Tsk), oxygen uptake (VO2), heart rate (HR), and cardiac output (Qc) were assessed periodically throughout the exercise period.  Ambient conditions were 24-25 degrees C and 38-52% relative humidity.  A significant group X time interaction was found for Tor (P less than 0.001) and Tsk (P less than 0.001).  Tor of the WD group steadily increased during the exercise, whereas the AB group showed a stable Tor.  Tsk of WD increased rapidly during the first 5-10 min of exercise and continued to rise at a slower rate throughout the exercise.  In contrast, Tsk of AB rose to a peak during the first 10 min and then showed a decreasing trend.  VO2 and HR remained stable in both groups throughout the exercise period.  Following an initial increase in Qc from minute 10 to minute 20 in both groups, values for WD continually decreased until Qc at 80 min was 14% lower than at 10 min.  The findings suggest that the WD women had greater thermoregulatory strain than the AB women as indicated by a higher Tor and Tsk and by an inability to maintain Qc due to paralysis of the lower limbs and perhaps an increase in cutaneous blood volume.
Responses of intercostal muscle biopsies from normal subjects and patients with myasthenia gravis.  In order to evaluate the mechanisms of weakness in muscles of patients with myasthenia gravis (MG), intercostal muscle biopsies were obtained from 9 normal subjects and 6 MG patients, and the compound muscle action potential (AP) and tension responses to nerve and muscle stimulation, and contracture responses on exposure to caffeine, were monitored in vitro.  In normal muscle, on stimulation of the nerve or muscle at 30 to 100 Hz, the AP responses showed decrement in amplitude, one-third of which was attributable to failure of neuromuscular transmission and two-thirds to failure of muscle membrane excitation.  On stimulation at 1 to 5 Hz, the AP responses showed very little decrement, while the contractile responses showed significant fade in tension, due to failure of E-C coupling or contractility.  In muscle from patients with generalized MG, stimulation of the nerve at all frequencies (1 to 100 Hz) caused much greater decrement in APs and fade in tension responses than in normal muscle, due mainly to failure of neuromuscular transmission.  However, at 100 Hz, 40% of the decrement in APs was due to failure of muscle membrane excitation, and at 1 to 5 Hz, 40% of the fade in tension was due to failure of E-C coupling or contractility, as in normal muscle.  On direct stimulation the contraction and half-relaxation times were slower and the tetanic tension was smaller than in normal muscle, especially in the MG patient with thymoma.  Caffeine-induced contractures were smaller in MG muscle than in normal muscle.  These results indicate that while the weakness of MG muscle is due mainly to failure of neuromuscular transmission, it is also partly due to reduced E-C coupling or contractility.
Sensitivity for detecting fibrillation potentials: a comparison between concentric and monopolar needle electrodes.  The sensitivity of monopolar and concentric electrodes for detecting fibrillation potentials (FP) has never been formally compared.  We studied 35 muscles with FP, sampling 20 sites each with concentric and monopolar needles.  The concentric needle identified 0.88 +/- 3.44 (mean +/- standard deviation) more sites with spontaneous activity.  Although statistically significant (Wilcoxon signed rank test P less than .03), this difference in sensitivity did not appreciably affect diagnostic interpretation.  Subjects described the concentric needles as more painful.  Needle insertions in 25 other muscles demonstrated that needle movement generated the majority of FP.  We suggest that the increased tissue injury caused by concentric needles may account for both their increased sensitivity and discomfort.
A review of techniques employed to estimate the number of motor units in a muscle.  Being the smallest functional units under neural control, motor units play an integral role in muscle physiology.  However, at the present time, there does not exist any widely accepted technique for quantifying or estimating the number of motor units in a muscle.  Specifically, the existing techniques are the increment-counting technique, a technique based on spike-triggered averaging, and a macro-EMG based technique which vary in invasiveness from noninvasive to highly invasive, respectively.  We discuss each of these techniques, along with their associated shortcomings, in detail.
Spatial dispersion of magnetic stimulation in peripheral nerves.  To assess the longitudinal dispersion of the stimulus induced by the magnetic coil, collision experiments were performed in seven normal ulnar nerves.  A supramaximal electrical stimulus S1 was delivered at the wrist, and followed by a supramaximal stimulus S2 in the upper arm, which was either electrical (electrical collision studies), or magnetic (magnetic collision studies).  The interstimulus interval was varied by 0.2 msec increments from the time of complete cancellation of the S2 evoked motor response onwards, to include the entire span of recovery of that compound motor action potential.  Collision curves were obtained for both magnetic and electrical stimuli by plotting the amplitude of the motor response elicited by S2 as a function of the interstimulus interval.  In all seven normal ulnar nerves, comparison of the collision curves showed that the S2 evoked motor response is restored significantly more slowly when magnetic stimulation is used.  This finding is best explained by longitudinal dispersion of the stimulus induced by the magnetic coil relative to conventional electrical stimulation, the large fibers being stimulated further away from the coil than the small ones.  This interpretation is confirmed by the findings obtained with the same method in two cases of ulnar neuropathy, and by comparison of different intensities of magnetic stimulation.
AAEM minimonograph #35: Clinical experience with transcranial magnetic stimulation.  We elicited motor evoked potentials (MEPs) using transcortical magnetic stimulation in 150 control subjects aged 14 to 85 years and 275 patients with a variety of diseases.  There were no significant side effects.  Cortex-to-target muscle latencies measured 20.2 +/- 1.6 ms (thenar), 14.2 +/- 1.7 ms (extensor digitorum communis), 9.4 +/- 1.7 ms (biceps), and 27.2 +/- 2.9 ms (tibialis anterior).  Central motor delay between the cortex and the C-7 and L-5 measured 6.7 +/- 1.2 ms and 13.1 +/- 3.8 ms, respectively.  Mean spinal cord motor conduction velocity measured 65.4 m/s.  MEP amplitude expressed as a percentage of the maximum M wave was never less than 20% of the M wave.  A value of less than 10% is considered abnormal.  MEP latency increases linearly with age and central motor delay is longer in older subjects.  Compound muscle action potentials and absolute MEP amplitudes decreased linearly with age.  In multiple sclerosis (MS), MEP latency and central delay were often very prolonged.  The MEP was more sensitive than the SEP in MS.  In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, MEP latencies were only modestly prolonged; the characteristic abnormality was reduced amplitude.  When pseudobulbar features predominated MEPs were often absent.  The MEP was of normal latency in Parkinson's disease, but age-related amplitude was often increased.  MEP latency and amplitude were normal in Huntington's disease.  Abnormal MEPs persisted several months after stroke despite good functional recovery.  The MEP could be used to advantage to demonstrate proximal conduction slowing and block in demyelinating neuropathies.  In plexopathy, ability to elicit an MEP several days after onset of paresis was good evidence of neuronal continuity in motor fibers.
Fibrillation potential amplitude and muscle atrophy following peripheral nerve injury.  Maximum peak-to-peak fibrillation potential amplitude was measured in 69 subjects between 7 days and 10 1/2 years post complete or partial peripheral nerve injury.  Mean amplitude during the first 2 months was 612 muV; third and fourth months 512 muV, fifth and sixth months 320 muV.  After the first year, no population of fibrillation potentials greater than 100 muV was recorded.  The sciatic nerve was sectioned in 13 guinea pigs and animals studied up to 17 weeks.  Fibrillation potential amplitude in gastrocnemius muscles declined paralleling that in humans.  By the end of the study, type I fibers had lost almost half of their initial diameter and type II fibers had atrophied more than twice this amount.  Fibrillation potential amplitude may be useful in estimating the time post nerve injury and appears to correlate with the surface area and fiber diameter of a type I muscle fiber.
Structure, expression and function of a schwannoma-derived growth factor.  During the development of the nervous system, cells require growth factors that regulate their division and survival.  To identify new growth factors, serum-free growth-conditioned media from many clonal cell lines were screened for the presence of mitogens for central nervous system glial cells.  A cell line secreting a potent glial mitogen was established from a tumour (or 'schwannoma') derived from the sheath of the sciatic nerve.  The cells of the tumour, named JS1 cells, were adapted to clonal culture and identified as Schwann cells.  Schwann cells secrete an autocrine mitogen and human schwannoma extracts have mitogenic activity on glial cells.  Until now, neither mitogen has been purified.  Here we report the purification and characterization of a mitogenic molecule, designated schwannoma-derived growth factor (SDGF), from the growth-conditioned medium of the JS1 Schwann cell line.  SDGF belongs to the epidermal growth factor family, and is an autocrine growth factor as well as a mitogen for astrocytes, Schwann cells and fibroblasts.
Limited selective posterior rhizotomy for the treatment of spasticity secondary to infantile cerebral palsy: a preliminary report.  A limited selective posterior rhizotomy was performed on 30 children suffering from spasticity secondary to infantile cerebral palsy.  As opposed to standard techniques that stimulate and divide the dorsal rootlets from L2 to S1, we dissected L4, L5, and S1 dorsal roots through an L5 to S1 laminectomy.  Eight to 12 rootlets from each root were electrically stimulated with two unipolar electrodes (pulse width, 50 microseconds; 10-50 V).  The muscle responses were observed visually and registered by electromyography.  Those rootlets associated with an abnormal motor response as evidenced by sustained muscular contraction or by prolonged electromyographic response were divided.  Spasticity was scored from 0 to +.  The muscular groups assessed were those involved in the flexion of the shoulder, elbow and wrist in the upper limbs, and those involved in flexion and adduction of the hip, flexion of the leg, and plantar flexion in the lower limbs.  The patients were assessed 1 week before and 6 months after the operation.  Reduction of spasticity was observed in all the muscular groups, and all the patients presented functional improvement of motor abilities.  These preliminary results indicate that a limited procedure that reduces the extension of the laminectomy and the length of the operation could be effective for treating spasticity secondary to infantile cerebral palsy.
Fractures of the clivus: classification and clinical features.  Fractures of the clival complex were diagnosed in a series of 17 patients admitted to the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services System and the University of Maryland Medical System over a 30-month period.  These fractures were divided pathologically into three types based upon their appearance on computed tomography: longitudinal, transverse, and oblique.  The mechanisms of injury were similar in all groups, and the Glasgow Coma Scale scores at admission were comparable, regardless of fracture type, in survivors and nonsurvivors.  Longitudinal fractures were associated with severe injury to the central nervous system and with brain stem infarction, and 4 of 6 (67%) of these patients died.  Transverse fractures of the clival complex were found in 6 patients, 3 of whom (50%) died.  All of these patients had fractures of the petrous ridge; 2 of the 3 survivors had multiple cranial nerve deficits, and one patient developed a carotid-cavernous fistula.  Of the 5 patients with oblique clival fractures, 2 survived (40%), both of whom had multiple cranial nerve palsies; in addition, one of these patients developed a carotid-cavernous fistula.  Using the present generation of computed tomographic scanners, fractures of the clival complex can be reliably diagnosed; they are probably more common than previously believed and can be separated into three groups based on the characteristics on computed tomographic scans and clinical findings.
Mechanism of stroke in patients taking aspirin.  During a 1-year period, we prospectively studied the mechanism and severity of stroke in 47 patients sustaining a cerebral infarction while taking aspirin.  The mechanism of stroke was undetermined in 12 patients (26%).  In the remaining 35 patients, we identified 39 potential mechanisms: large-artery atherosclerosis (19 patients, 40%), cardioembolism (15 patients, 32%), and small-vessel occlusive disease (5 patients, 11%).  Of 11 patients with carotid atherosclerosis and stroke, 9 (82%) had greater than 90% carotid stenosis or occlusion; of 12 patients with stroke of undetermined mechanism, 10 (83%) had previous stroke, of which 8 were also of undetermined mechanisms.  Disability after stroke was moderate or severe in 27 patients (57%).  These data suggest that (1) stroke in patients taking aspirin has a variety of etiologies and frequently causes moderate or severe disability; (2) patients with carotid disease failing aspirin often have high-grade carotid stenosis or occlusion; (3) stroke of undetermined mechanism may recur more frequently than other stroke subtypes in patients taking aspirin.
A case-control study of Alzheimer's disease in Australia.  We conducted a case-control study of clinically diagnosed Alzheimer's disease (AD) on 170 cases aged 52 to 96 years, and 170 controls matched for age, sex and, where possible, the general practice of origin.  Trained lay interviewers naive to the hypotheses and to the clinical status of the elderly person carried out risk-factor interviews with informants.  Significant odds ratios were found for 4 variables: a history of either dementia, probable AD, or Down's syndrome in a 1st-degree relative, and underactivity as a behavioral trait in both the recent and more distant past.  Previously reported or suggested associations not confirmed by this study include head injury, starvation, thyroid disease, analgesic abuse, antacid use (aluminum exposure), alcohol abuse, smoking, and being left-handed.
The opposite pupil in herniation.  I serially examined the pupil opposite the one already enlarged from transtentorial herniation in 13 patients.  The main abnormalities, stereotyped in most patients, were an initially diminished light reaction with a 2.5- to 4-mm-diameter pupil, followed by slight reduction in size, and then reenlargement to greater than original size, all with preserved roundness.  Subsequent deterioration varied among patients, but a transitional oval shape was infrequent and oculomotor function was preserved until both pupils were enlarged and fixed.  Once the pupil on the side of a mass enlarges, heralding herniation, subsequent deterioration can be appreciated through changes in reactivity and size of the opposite pupil.
Spatiotemporal contrast sensitivity differs in normal aging and Parkinson's disease.  We measured contrast sensitivity for static and laterally drifting vertical gratings in 12 young adults, 7 normal elderly adults, and 8 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD).  We compared static and motion contrast sensitivity for spatial frequencies of 0.25, 1, and 4 cycles per degree (cpd), and temporal frequencies of 1, 3, and 9 Hz.  Results show that normal aging leads to a reduction of motion sensitivity for the spatial frequency of 0.25 cpd.  Compared with elderly controls, PD patients do not present specific abnormalities in this domain.  However, for spatial frequencies of 1 and 4 cpd and temporal frequencies of 1 and 3 Hz, motion sensitivity is worse than static sensitivity in PD patients and not in elderly controls.  These findings suggest a specific deficit of motion perception in PD, and possible dopaminergic involvement in the control of visuospatial behavior.
Anti-GM1 IgM antibodies in motor neuron disease and neuropathy.  We found anti-GM1 IgM antibodies in 23% of 56 patients with motor neuron disease (MND), in 19% of 69 patients with neuropathy, and in 7% of 107 controls with other neurologic and nonneurologic diseases.  Most of these patients had anti-GM1 IgM antibody titers of 1:80 or less; slightly higher antibody titers (up to 1:640) were found in 3 patients, 1 with MND and 2 with neuropathy, and very high titers (1:20,480) in a patient with MND and an IgM kappa M protein that reacted with GM1, GD1b, and asialo GM1.  Six other patients with anti-GM1 IgM that also bound to GD1b.  Reactivity with GD1b did not correlate with anti-GM1 titers but was only present in patients with MND or neuropathy.  Anti-GM1 IgM antibodies may be a normal constituent of the human antibody repertoire but their frequency and, in some cases, their levels are higher in patients with MND and neuropathy.  The origin and the pathogenetic role of these antibodies in neural impairment remain to be established.
Signs distinguishing spasmus nutans (with and without central nervous system lesions) from infantile nystagmus.  Clinical findings as well as eye and head movement recordings were analyzed from 23 patients with spasmus nutans without central nervous system (CNS) changes, 10 patients with spasmus nutans-like disease (head nodding, intermittent nystagmus associated with intracranial anomalies or visual pathway disorders), and 25 patients with infantile nystagmus.  Ten diagnostic signs were established to differentiate between the patient groups.  Although they were helpful in separating patients with infantile nystagmus from those with spasmus nutans, no difference was found between the patients with spasmus nutans with and without CNS lesions.  This study indicates that eye and head movement recordings do not allow differentiation between benign spasmus nutans and spasmus nutans-like disease.  The differentiation must be made on the basis of neuroimaging.
Late juvenile-onset Krabbe's disease.  Krabbe's disease is an autosomal recessive leukodystrophy characterized by a lack of galactocerebroside beta-galactosidase activity.  In contrast to the classic early infantile-onset form of Krabbe's disease, less recognized, late-onset variants exist.  The authors present a case of late juvenile-onset Krabbe's disease, including the associated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings.  Most patients with late-onset Krabbe's disease present with visual loss due to optic atrophy.  Associated gait abnormalities and parental consanguinity should increase the clinician's suspicion that a child may have late-onset Krabbe's disease.  Because of the prolonged survival in late-onset Krabbe's disease, the recent development of bone marrow transplantation for these patient makes diagnosis of this disorder particularly important.
Antinociception and cardiovascular responses produced by electrical stimulation in the nucleus tractus solitarius, nucleus reticularis ventralis, and the caudal medulla.  In experiment 1, quantitative regional comparisons of the antinociceptive and cardiovascular responses produced by electrical stimulation in the caudal medulla, including regions such as the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS), nucleus reticularis ventralis (NRV), nucleus reticularis gigantocellularis (NRGC), nucleus reticularis paragigantocellularis (NRPGC), nucleus raphe obscurus (NRO), and medial portions of the lateral reticular nucleus (LRN), were made in the rat.  Electrical stimulation in all of these regions resulted in inhibition of the nociceptive tail-flick reflex, although the threshold intensity for inhibition was greater for sites in NTS compared to many sites ventral to the NTS.  Antinociception was generally accompanied by an increase in mean arterial blood pressure, with the exception of sites in the NRO, where depressor responses were evoked by stimulation.  Detailed comparisons between the NTS and NRV revealed that greater intensities of electrical stimulation were required to produce antinociception for sites in the NTS as compared to the NRV.  There were no significant differences in threshold intensities for antinociception as a function of rostrocaudal subdivisions of the NTS, but the lateral subdivision of the NTS was significantly more efficacious than the medial subdivision.  This mediolateral difference within NTS was primarily due to stimulation in medial sites producing overt movements in some animals, probably due to stimulation of adjacent midline nuclei or pathways.  Within the NRV, thresholds for inhibition of the tail-flick reflex were greater for sites in the dorsal subdivision as compared to the ventral subdivision, which contains spinopetal projections from the NRM.  The slopes of the lines of recruitment for inhibition of the tail-flick reflex at stimulation sites in either the NTS or NRV were both very steep, similar to other forms of antinociception.  In experiment 2, the pulse duration of electrical stimulation was varied for sites of stimulation in the lateral NTS and NRV to generate strength-duration curves.  This experiment confirmed that stimulation sites in the lateral NTS required greater current intensities to inhibit the tail-flick reflex than sites in the NRV.  However, the chronaxies derived from the strength-duration functions for the NTS or NRV were both approximately 170 microseconds, indicating that the antinociceptive effects in these regions may not be exclusively due to the stimulation of fibers of passage.  These results are discussed in terms of the role of the NTS, NRV, and caudal medulla in the modulation of nociceptive responses and cardiovascular function.
Pain in children.  The assessment and management of children's pain is a topic that has received a great deal of attention since the late 1970s.  Nurse researchers have played a dominant role in all areas of pediatric pain relief and likely will continue to do so.  There are currently a number of pediatric pain assessment instruments developed that are used in selected practice settings, but their use should be extended to document the existence of pediatric pain and its relief.  Pharmacologic interventions for pediatric pain relief have been hampered by incorrect beliefs about analgesic risks, prescribing and administrating habits, and a virtual explosion of information in the area of analgesics.  Although nurses have traditionally used nonpharmacologic interventions for pain relief, these methods have not been well researched.  Continued research efforts in this important area will result in improved diagnosis and management of pediatric pain.
Confusion.  The term confusion describes a plethora of possible cognitive deficits and behavioral manifestations.  A subjective assessment of confusion must be followed by an objective systematic evaluation to develop the cognitive-behavior profile.  Because of age-associated physiologic and pathologic changes, elderly patients are at high risk for developing acute confusion.  The management of confusion presents a challenge to nursing.  Nursing can play a significant role in the prevention and the early detection of acute confusion.  Preventing or identifying confusion early will decrease the physical and psychological stress of the patient as well as decrease the cost of hospitalization by shortening length of stay.  Additional research is needed to determine the efficacy of present nursing activities and to identify new approaches for management.
Steroids induce acetylcholine receptors on cultured human muscle: implications for myasthenia gravis.  Antibodies to the acetylcholine receptor (AChR), which are diagnostic of the human autoimmune disease myasthenia gravis, block AChR function and increase the rate of AChR degradation leading to impaired neuromuscular transmission.  Steroids are frequently used to alleviate symptoms of muscle fatigue and weakness in patients with myasthenia gravis because of their well-documented immunosuppressive effects.  We show here that the steroid dexamethasone significantly increases total surface AChRs on cultured human muscle exposed to myasthenia gravis sera.  Our results suggest that the clinical improvement observed in myasthenic patients treated with steroids is due not only to an effect on the immune system but also to a direct effect on muscle.  We propose that the identification and development of pharmacologic agents that augment receptors and other proteins that are reduced by human genetic or autoimmune disease will have broad therapeutic applications.
Controlling stability of a complex movement system.  Human movement systems have frequently been treated as one-dimensional, single-axis, rigid bodies in order to simplify the gathering, analysis, and interpretation of data.  The problem with this approach is that the results of such assumptions often lead to conclusions about the production and control of movement that do not relate to the control demands placed on the central nervous system.  In order to truly understand how the central nervous system plans and produces movements to match environmental demands, we must take into account the many variations available within the body.  The purpose of this article is to examine two movement systems that have the potential to act in multiple spatial dimensions with variable muscle action patterns when performing a stabilizing task.  Methods of analyzing how the systems operate under differing task constraints and results of the experiments will be presented.  Hypothetical models that have been proposed to explain how complex movement systems operate will also be discussed.
Correlation of clinical and computed tomographic findings in stroke patients.  We evaluated the correlation between clinical features and computed tomographic findings in a prospective study of 1,191 consecutive patients with acute cerebrovascular disease seen during 1 year.  In the 386 patients in whom symptoms and signs initially suggested a cerebrovascular disorder, computed tomography revealed a relevant lesion in 154 (hemorrhagic in 52 [33.8%], ischemic in 102 [66.2%]) and a significant nonstroke abnormality in 14 (3.1%).  Among the remaining 805 patients with symptoms and signs suggesting some central nervous system disorder other than stroke, computed tomography revealed a cerebrovascular lesion in 38 (4.7%); 35 of these lesions were ischemic.  The computed tomographic findings was compatible with the final clinical diagnosis in 192 (84.2%) of the 228 patients with lesions.  In the entire sample of 1,191 patients, a cerebrovascular disorder would have been missed in 38 (3.2%) without computed tomography.  On the other hand, computed tomography failed to visualize a cerebrovascular lesion in 40 patients in whom such a lesion was clinically obvious.  Our results emphasize that both careful neurologic assessment and a policy of early computed tomography are of crucial importance in the diagnosis of stroke and for therapeutic considerations.
Progressing cerebral infarction in relation to plasma glucose in gerbils.  We studied neurologic morbidity and its evolution during hyperglycemia induced immediately after permanent unilateral common carotid artery ligation in Mongolian gerbils.  A total of 60 animals were divided into five groups: one experiencing severe hyperglycemia for 1 hour after the onset of ischemia (brief hyperglycemia group, n = 13), a normoglycemic control group for the brief hyperglycemia group (n = 12), a group with severe hyperglycemia for 4 hours after the onset of ischemia (prolonged hyperglycemia group, n = 11), a normoglycemic control group for the prolonged hyperglycemia group (n = 13), and a hyperosmolar normoglycemic control group for the prolonged hyperglycemia group (n = 11).  Neurologic morbidity and mortality were higher in the two hyperglycemic groups than in the three normoglycemic control groups.  The neurologic deficit progressed according to the duration of severe hyperglycemia.  In the three normoglycemic control groups neurologic status stabilized 120 minutes after the onset of ischemia, in the brief hyperglycemia group stabilization occurred at 210 minutes, and in the prolonged hyperglycemia group neurologic deficit progressed for approximately 360 minutes, coinciding with the death of all but one gerbil, in which the neurologic deficit remained stable until death 23 hours after ischemia.  We suggest that hyperglycemia is another cause of progressing cerebral infarction.
Embolic stroke after smoking "crack" cocaine.  A 39-year-old woman had an embolic upper division middle cerebral artery branch occlusion 3 hours after smoking the free base of cocaine ("crack").  Radionuclide ventriculography demonstrated cardiomyopathy, and echocardiography documented a left atrial thrombus.  This case demonstrates that embolism is one mechanism of ischemic stroke after cocaine use, and that cardiomyopathy, possibly cocaine induced, may be the source of embolus.  A cardiac source of embolus should be sought in patients with cocaine-associated cerebral infarction.
Growth factor expression after stroke.  Fibroblast growth factors are polypeptides with potent trophic effects on central nervous system cells.  Both acidic and basic forms of fibroblast growth factor are found in the mammalian brain.  We have examined the expression of these factors after focal brain injury or stroke.  After infarction of the lateral cerebral cortex in the mature rat brain, we found a twofold to threefold increase during the first 3 weeks after stroke in levels of fibroblast growth factors in tissue surrounding infarcts.  This increase persisted for at least 2 months and appeared mainly to be due to increased levels of basic, but not acidic, fibroblast growth factor.  Because of its gliotrophic, angiogenic, and neuronotrophic properties, basic fibroblast growth factor may play an important role in the cascade of cellular reactions that contributes to wound healing and functional recovery after stroke.
Molecular biology of atherothrombotic brain infarction.  Because reduced high density lipoproteins may contribute to atherothrombotic brain infarction, we performed molecular biologic and metabolic studies to characterize high density lipoprotein metabolism with respect to its role in reverse cholesterol transport, to clone the high density lipoprotein receptor, and to determine gene polymorphism for apolipoprotein A-I, the major protein of high density lipoprotein, because altered structure may impair reverse cholesterol transport.  For high density lipoprotein metabolism measurements, high density lipoprotein 3 was isolated, purified, and labeled with iodine-125.  The radiolabeled high density lipoprotein 3 was reinjected, and daily blood samples were taken for 10 days.  Synthesis rates and fractional catabolic rates were determined from the specific activities and daily decrements.  Preliminary data indicate that stroke-prone individuals' fractional catabolic rates for high density lipoprotein 3 are twice those of normal individuals.  Also, the conversion of high density lipoprotein 3 to high density lipoprotein 2 is reduced in these individuals, suggesting that high density lipoprotein may be abnormally processed in individuals prone to atherothrombic brain infarctions.  We surveyed more than 100 patients with carotid stenosis using a 2.2-kb probe for the apolipoprotein A-I gene.  A subset of these patients displays polymorphism with restriction enzymes SacI or PstI.  These preliminary findings suggest that gene polymorphism for apolipoprotein A-I may provide a molecular clue of atherothrombic brain infarction.
Pharmacology of recovery after stroke.  Laboratory research during the past decade has begun to provide insights into the neurobiologic basis of functional recovery after brain injury.  It is clear that drugs influencing specific neurotransmitters also can influence the recovery process.  Some of these drugs may be beneficial, but others may be detrimental.  Some of the difficulties in interpreting the results of these behavioral studies are reviewed, and potential mechanisms of drug effects are discussed.  These types of studies are leading to an increased awareness of the potentially harmful effects of some drugs often given to stroke patients.  Pharmacotherapy designed to enhance functional recovery after stroke may be possible in the future.
Influence of amphetamine treatment on somatosensory function of the normal and infarcted rat brain.  The consequences of acute amphetamine administration on the metabolic responsiveness of the cerebral cortex to physiologic activation were studied in normal and infarcted rats.  Treated rats received a 4 mg/kg intravenous injection of d-amphetamine 1 hour before unilateral vibrissae stimulation and 2-deoxyglucose study.  In nontreated normal rats, metabolic activation was restricted to the major relay stations of the vibrissae-barrel circuit.  In amphetamine-treated rats, stimulation-induced increased glucose utilization was widespread, including ipsilateral and contralateral cortical regions outside the barrel field circuit.  For example, an 84% increase in glucose utilization above control was seen in cortical areas anterior to the barrel field region.  Increased glucose utilization induced by stimulation was severely depressed in nontreated rats that had undergone infarction of the left cortical barrel field 2 weeks previously.  Vibrissae stimulation failed to increase glucose utilization significantly in cortical areas remote from the infarct.  In contrast, bilateral increases in glucose utilization were observed within cortical regions of treated infarcted rats.  For example, a 50% increase in glucose utilization was detected in cortical areas bordering the infarct.  Thus, in the normal and infarcted rat, amphetamine appears to promote alternate circuit activation--a pharmacologic property that may be advantageous for recovery after injury.
Effects of MK-801 on recovery from sensorimotor cortex lesions.  Histologic evidence suggests that drugs acting as noncompetitive antagonists at the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor can have beneficial or pathologic effects on central nervous system neurons.  In the present experiments we examined the effects of MK-801 on recovery of behavioral function after unilateral lesions in the rat somatic sensorimotor cortex.  In the first experiment, rats with unilateral sensorimotor cortex lesions were given either MK-801 (1 mg/kg) or saline 12-16 hours after surgery.  Additional injections were given on postoperative days 2, 4, and 6.  Behavioral tests measured somatosensory asymmetries (i.e., bilateral tactile stimulation tests) and forelimb placing.  After creation of sensorimotor cortex lesions, rats showed an ipsilateral somatosensory bias and an impairment in placing the contralateral forelimb.  Rats treated with MK-801 recovered slightly faster than saline-treated animals as measured by a bilateral tactile stimulation test (p less than 0.05).  In contrast, there was no significant difference between the groups in the recovery of forelimb placing.  In a second experiment, rats with sensorimotor cortex lesions were treated with a single injection of MK-801 after behavioral recovery.  Twenty hours after the MK-801 injection, rats with sensorimotor cortex lesions showed a reinstatement of the placing deficits.  The impairment endured for at least 7 days after injection.  These behavioral data support the idea that MK-801 can have either beneficial or detrimental effects when administered after brain damage.
Ionic channels, cholinergic mechanisms, and recovery of sensorimotor function after neocortical infarcts in rats.  Unilateral photochemical infarcts were produced in the hind limb sensorimotor neocortex of 243 rats by intravenous injection of the fluorescein derivative Rose Bengal and focal illumination of the intact skull surface.  Facial contact stimuli governed the degree and recovery rate of contralateral tactile/proprioceptive forelimb placing reactions.  Contralateral forelimb placing recovered, whereas hind limb placing was resistant to recovery.  Infarcted rats displayed marked recovery of spontaneous limb usage (beam traversing).  However, deficits in isolated tactile/proprioceptive hind limb placing reactions endured.  Posttreatment with the class IV calcium antagonist flunarizine after neocortical infarction protected sensorimotor function in a dose-dependent manner.  This protective effect may be due to the peculiar ionic channel blocking profile of flunarizine.  Scopolamine hydrobromide reinstated contralateral placing errors in infarcted rats at a dosage that did not affect neurologically intact rats.  The cognitive enhancer sabeluzole, a novel benzothiazol derivative, dose-dependently blocked the anticholinergic-induced deterioration of a sensorimotor deficit in rats.
Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrates that electric stimulation of cerebellar fastigial nucleus reduces cerebral infarction in rats.  We sought to determine whether high spatial resolution magnetic resonance imaging is useful for noninvasive quantitation of the ischemic infarct produced by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery and for detection of reduced infarct volume elicited by electric stimulation of the cerebellar fastigial nucleus.  Male rats of the spontaneously hypertensive strain were anesthetized, the middle cerebral artery was occluded, and the fastigial nucleus was stimulated for 1 hour.  Twenty-four hours later, rats were reanesthetized and T1- and T2-weighted images were obtained.  Rats were killed and the volume and distribution of the lesion was established by histopathology.  Magnetic resonance imaging estimates of the lesion volume were 271 +/- 41.0 mm3 (middle cerebral artery, n = 5) and 148 +/- 8.4 mm3 (middle cerebral artery + fastigial nucleus stimulation, n = 6; 45% reduction, p less than 0.05).  Histopathological analysis revealed a lesion of 229.8 +/- 15.4 mm3 involving somatosensory cortex, lateral caudate putamen, and lateral hippocampus.  Fastigial nucleus stimulation resulted in a 36% reduction in infarct volume to 146.0 +/- 10.3 mm3.  The retrieved zone was largely in the cortex dorsal and ventral to the lesion and mostly posterior to the lesion.  The estimates of lesion volume by magnetic resonance imaging and histopathology did not differ and were highly correlated (r = 0.90; p less than 0.001).  This study confirms our previous finding that fastigial nucleus stimulation reduces the volume of a focal ischemic infarct and demonstrates that magnetic resonance imaging not only accurately estimates the volume of the lesion but also can detect changes as small as 50-100 mm3.
Symptomatic carotid endarterectomy trials.  The possible benefit of carotid endarterectomy in stroke prevention is being evaluated in three major clinical trials.  To date, the European Carotid Surgery Trial has randomized 2,200 patients, 30% of whom have a carotid stenosis of greater than 70% appropriate to their symptoms.  The North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial has randomized 1,000 patients, of whom more than half have this severity of appropriate stenosis.  Quality control and the evaluation of outcome events in this trial is achieved by a three-tier review, including review by medical and surgical adjudicators who are blinded to the treatment arm of each patient.  Baseline characteristics of the patients eligible but not randomized are similar to those of patients who have been randomized.  Two percent of the patients randomized to the surgical arm have declined surgery and crossed over to the medical arm, and 3% have elected surgery after randomization to the medical arm.  Both of these studies, as well as a Veterans Administration trial, are continuing to randomize patients.
Putative neuroexcitation in cerebral ischemia and brain injury.  Involvement of neuroexcitatory mechanisms in cerebral ischemia and brain injury was explored in experimental models of repetitive forebrain ischemia by temporary occlusion of carotid arteries in gerbils and cryogenic injury to the cerebral cortex in rats and gerbils.  Our observations in these models revealed a pattern of injury that involved some anatomic structures outside the areas of direct ischemic or traumatic insult.  Such foci of injury revealed conspicuously abnormal uptake of 45Ca associated with slight or moderate neuronal alteration, whereas severely injured areas showed no 45Ca uptake.  Electron microscopic observations revealed a characteristic presence of calcium in swollen dendrites, closely resembling pictures obtained in neuroexcitatory conditions such as epileptic seizures.  Abnormal uptake of 45Ca was associated with apparent blood-brain barrier changes characterized by intracytoplasmic uptake of extravasated albumin into the neurons.  Protein synthesis assayed by in vivo [3H]leucine incorporation was reduced in regions showing calcium accumulation.  Our observations suggest that neuroexcitation may play an important role in development of secondary and chronic changes after ischemic or traumatic brain insults.
Platelet-activating factor. A putative mediator in central nervous system injury?  Platelet-activating factor (1-O-hexadecyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphorylcholine) is a potent lipid autacoid produced by many cell types.  Platelet-activating factor is produced by cerebellar granule cells in culture and has been extracted from brain tissue.  Multiple platelet-activating factor receptors have been demonstrated in brain tissue.  Activation of platelet-activating factor receptors in transformed neuronal cell lines involved increases in intracellular calcium.  Platelet-activating factor has potent actions on cerebral vessels and cerebral metabolism when administered in vivo, but may not have direct effects on brain microvessels.  Excessive platelet-activating factor production in pathological states of the nervous system such as neurotrauma and stroke has been shown in only a few models (e.g., spinal cord ischemia and reperfusion or focal repercussion brain injury).  In multiple studies using highly specific and potent platelet-activating factor antagonists, reversal or prevention of key consequences of brain injury such as hypoperfusion following ischemia, reperfusion and edema, inflammatory cell accumulation, neurologic/motor deficits, and neuronal salvage were demonstrated.  This review provides and analyzes evidence in support of the role that platelet-activating factor might have in modulation of brain function and pathophysiological processes in brain ischemia and trauma.
Physical features of Prader-Willi syndrome in neonates.  A retrospective study of 16 patients was undertaken to identify physical features that may typify neonates with Prader-Willi syndrome.  Several features known to be typical of Prader-Willi syndrome in early infancy were confirmed, including hypotonia and genital hypoplasia.  A number of features that have not previously been emphasized as characterizing Prader-Willi syndrome were also identified, most notably abnormal cry and, in males, signs of genital hypoplasia but with an apparently normal phallus.  Other features included disproportionately large head circumference, disproportionately large anterior fontanelle, mild micrognathia, mild anomalies of the gingivae or alveolar ridges, and changes in the appearance of the skin.  Appreciation of these features may assist the pediatrician in recognizing the child with Prader-Willi syndrome during the neonatal period, before the appearance of better-known findings of later onset, such as obesity and acromicria.
Replication patterns of the fragile X in heterozygous carriers: analysis by a BrdUrd antibody method.  The replication status of the fragile X chromosomes was studied in short-term cultures of lymphocytes from six female heterozygous carriers.  The fragile X was induced by adding 0.1 microM fluorodeoxyuridine during the last 24 h of culturing.  The replication status of the X chromosomes was studied using a bromodeoxyuridine (BrdUrd) antibody method.  BrdUrd was added (1) at a final concentration of 0.2 micrograms/ml during the early S phase of chromosome replication (16-10 h before harvest), (2) at 0.2 microgram/ml during the late S phase (the last 6 h of culturing), (3) at 20 micrograms/ml during the early S phase, and (4) at 20 micrograms/ml during the late S phase.  BrdUrd that was incorporated into replicating chromosomes was detected by using a nuclease and BrdUrd monoclonal antibody.  The frequency of the fragile X was reduced by BrdUrd treatment.  The degree of reduction was more severe in the 20 micrograms/ml than in the 0.2 microgram/ml series and was more severe with late S than with early S treatment.  Of the early- and late-replicating fragile X chromosomes, those which were actively replicating during a BrdUrd treatment were more reduced than the others.  Thus, the average rate of early and late S treatment with 0.2 microgram BrdUrd/ml was assumed to be the closest reflection of the situation in vivo.  There was no correlation between the average rate of the early replicating, active fragile X and the intelligence of the heterozygous carriers studied.
The Woolley and Roe case. A reassessment.  In 1953, two patients, Cecil Roe and Albert Woolley, sued their anaesthetist for alleged negligence because they had developed painful spastic paraparesis after spinal anaesthesia.  The court found that phenol, which was used to sterilise the outside of the ampoules of local anaesthetic, had percolated the glass through invisible cracks, contaminating the solution, but that the anaesthetist could not have been aware of this risk.  The case was important, despite the fact that judgement was in favour of the anaesthetist, because of the fears that it generated over the incidence of paralysis after spinal anaesthesia.  The 'invisible crack' theory has been the subject of much scepticism.  New information has been obtained, and the case re-examined objectively.  The most probable source of contamination, which led to paralysis in the two patients, and in a third who received spinal anaesthesia on the same day, has been identified.  A similar explanation may lie behind a number of other episodes of paralysis associated with spinal anaesthesia.
Loss of consciousness after emergence from anaesthesia. A case of suspected micturition syncope.  A case of postanaesthesia micturition syncope with respiratory arrest is described.  If syncope occurs, the temporary myocardial ischaemia and cerebral hypoperfusion may increase anaesthetic risk in the marginally compensated patient.  The loss of airway protection during the syncopal period is also a cause of concern.  We recommend the use of an indwelling bladder catheter during any prolonged surgical procedure.
Relief of injection pain in adults. EMLA cream for 5 minutes before venepuncture.  The effectiveness of skin anaesthesia after 5 minutes' topical application of a lignocaine-prilocaine cream was evaluated.  One hundred and twenty patients estimated the pain of antecubital venepuncture both on a linear scale and verbally after use of the cream for either 5 or 60 minutes, a placebo cream or no treatment.  Reported pain was significantly less after only 5 minutes of the lignocaine-prilocaine cream (p = 0.002).  The cream can be used to relieve the pain of all routine injections.
Resistance to atracurium-induced neuromuscular blockade in patients with intractable seizure disorders treated with anticonvulsants.  Previous studies have demonstrated that, with the exception of atracurium, resistance to the neuromuscular blocking effects of various muscle relaxants develops in patients receiving anticonvulsant therapy.  We studied the effects of 0.5 mg/kg IV atracurium in 53 neurosurgical patients: 21 nonepileptic patients receiving no anticonvulsant therapy (MED = 0); 14 epileptic patients treated with carbamazepine for years (MED = 1); and 18 epileptic patients treated with carbamazepine plus either phenytoin or valproic acid for years (MED = 2).  The evoked compound electromyogram of the adductor pollicis brevis was recorded, and results were analyzed using analysis of covariance, with weight and age as covariables.  The onset time was not significantly different among the three groups.  Times for recovery of baseline and train-of-four responses to stimuli were significantly shorter in the MED = 1 and MED = 2 groups than in control patients (MED = 0).  The recovery index (time between 25% and 75% recovery of baseline electromyogram values) was progressively shorter in the three groups (MED = 0: 8.02 min; MED = 1: 5.93 min; MED = 2: 1.96 min; P less than 0.001).  This study demonstrates that atracurium, when used on epileptic patients requiring long-term (that is, years of) anticonvulsant therapy, has a shorter duration of action than when used in nonepileptic patients.
Differential effect of oncotic pressure on cerebral and extracerebral water content during cardiopulmonary bypass in rabbits.  To study the effect of oncotic pressure on brain water content during cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), 14 anesthetized New Zealand White rabbits underwent 60 min of nonpulsatile CPB at normothermia.  Animals were grouped according to the composition of the circuit priming fluid.  Group 1 animals (n = 7) received a priming fluid (6.5% hydroxyethyl starch in 0.72 N NaCl; 323 +/- 13 mOsm/kg [mean +/- SD]) that maintained normal colloid oncotic pressure (COP) during CPB (19.0 +/- 1.5 mmHg).  Group 2 animals (n = 7) received a priming fluid (0.9 N NaCl; 324 +/- 23 mOsm/kg) that led to a hypooncotic state (COP = 6.2 +/- 1.2 mmHg).  Blood chemistries and hemodynamics were recorded every 15 min during CPB.  Animals were given additional priming fluid and sodium bicarbonate during CPB to maintain a circuit flow of 85 ml.kg-1.min-1 and arterial pH greater than 7.35.  There were no significant differences between groups 1 and 2 with respect to temperature, central venous pressure, mean arterial pressure, PaO2, PaCO2, plasma sodium concentration, or osmolality at any time during CPB, although osmolality increased in both groups.  After 60 min of bypass, animals were killed and organ water contents were determined by wet/dry weight ratios.  A separate group of nine similarly prepared and anesthetized animals that did not undergo cannulation or CPB also underwent measurement of plasma chemistries and tissue water contents and served as nonbypass controls (group 3).  Brain and kidney water contents were unaffected by oncotic pressure, whereas duodenum and skeletal muscle had significantly greater water content (P = 0.003 and P = 0.008, respectively) after hypooncotic CPB.
Neurologic complications of cocaine abuse.  The neurologic complications of cocaine toxicity are responsible for a major portion of the morbidity and mortality associated with cocaine.  Most of the complications appear to be related to the hyperadrenergic state induced by cocaine and may be treated symptomatically.  Diazepam is the most effective drug for cocaine-induced seizures.
Improving outcomes of analgesic treatment: is education enough?   Frequent undertreatment of analgesic-responsive acute pain and chronic cancer pain persists, despite intensive efforts to provide clinicians with information about analgesics.  A set of background factors must be addressed in interventions to improve pain treatment: Traditional patterns of clinician and patient interaction on the ward, quality assurance, and drug regulatory practices do not support prompt recognition and treatment of pain.  Possible interventions to modify these patterns of daily practice include monitoring and displaying patient pain ratings routinely, making available educational tools to assist optimal drug ordering, encouraging patients to communicate about unrelieved pain, reviewing quality assurance of pain treatment regimens, increasing behavioral research into analgesic prescribing, and selectively modifying narcotics regulatory practices.
Clarifying confusion: the confusion assessment method. A new method for detection of delirium   OBJECTIVE: To develop and validate a new standardized confusion assessment method (CAM) that enables nonpsychiatric clinicians to detect delirium quickly in high-risk settings.  DESIGN: Prospective validation study.  SETTING: Conducted in general medicine wards and in an outpatient geriatric assessment center at Yale University (site 1) and in general medicine wards at the University of Chicago (site 2).  PATIENTS: The study included 56 subjects, ranging in age from 65 to 98 years.  At site 1, 10 patients with and 20 without delirium participated; at site 2, 16 patients with and 10 without delirium participated.  MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: An expert panel developed the CAM through a consensus building process.  The CAM instrument, which can be completed in less than 5 minutes, consists of nine operationalized criteria from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III-R).  An a priori hypothesis was established for the diagnostic value of four criteria: acute onset and fluctuating course, inattention, disorganized thinking, and altered level of consciousness.  The CAM algorithm for diagnosis of delirium required the presence of both the first and the second criteria and of either the third or the fourth criterion.  At both sites, the diagnoses made by the CAM were concurrently validated against the diagnoses made by psychiatrists.  At sites 1 and 2 values for sensitivity were 100% and 94%, respectively; values for specificity were 95% and 90%; values for positive predictive accuracy were 91% and 94%; and values for negative predictive accuracy were 100% and 90%.  The CAM algorithm had the highest predictive accuracy for all possible combinations of the nine features of delirium.  The CAM was shown to have convergent agreement with four other mental status tests, including the Mini-Mental State Examination.  The interobserver reliability of the CAM was high (kappa = 0.81 - 1.0).  CONCLUSIONS: The CAM is sensitive, specific, reliable, and easy to use for identification of delirium.
Auras and subclinical seizures: characteristics and prognostic significance.  The characteristics and prognostic significance of subclinical seizures and independent auras were studied in 40 patients with partial epilepsy who had long-term electroencephalographic (EEG) monitoring with intracranial electrodes.  Focal, restricted subclinical seizures were noted in 23 patients, and 11 patients experienced auras that were accompanied by ictal EEG discharges.  Auras and subclinical seizures usually were identical in EEG appearance, but were distributed differently among patients.  The subclinical seizures and auras usually had the same origin as complex partial seizures, but did not always reliably indicate complex partial seizure origin.  Subclinical seizures and auras were of favorable prognostic significance for patients undergoing temporal lobectomy.  A majority (greater than 80%) of individuals with subclinical seizures and auras were free of complex partial seizures after surgery, whereas a minority (29%) of patients without subclinical seizures and auras became free of complex partial seizures.
Substantia nigra: a site of action of muscle relaxant drugs.  Sites of action of centrally active muscle relaxant drugs are not well defined.  Clinical experience with such drugs suggests that the spinal cord may be one of the important regions from which pathologically increased muscle tone may be relieved.  Supraspinal centers that may also be involved in the expression of muscle relaxant action have not yet been defined.  We report here that microinjections of therapeutically relevant muscle relaxants into the midbrain tegmentum of genetically spastic rats decrease muscle tone.  The substantia nigra is the region from which midazolam, baclofen, and tizanidine (drugs used clinically in the treatment of spasticity), or gamma-vinyl-GABA, (-)-2-amino-7-phosphonoheptanoate, and [D-pro2-D-phe7-D-trp9]-substance P (experimental drugs active in animal models of spasticity), reduce muscle tone in genetically spastic rats and Hoffmann reflexes in normal rats.  The effects of muscle relaxant drugs are topographically restricted to the substantia nigra pars reticulata and are receptor specific.  These observations disclose a previously unknown function of the substantia nigra in mediating muscle relaxation.
IgM deposits at nodes of Ranvier in a patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, anti-GM1 antibodies, and multifocal motor conduction block.  We studied a patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multifocal motor conduction block, and IgM anti-GM1 antibodies.  A sural nerve biopsy demonstrated deposits of IgM at nodes of Ranvier by direct immunofluorescence.  The deposits were granular and located in the nodal gap between adjacent myelin internodes, and in some instances, they extended along the surface of the paranodal myelin sheath.  When injected into rat sciatic nerve, the serum IgM bound to the nodes of Ranvier, and the binding activity was removed by preincubation with GM1.  These observations suggest that anti-GM1 antibodies may have caused motor dysfunction by binding to the nodal and paranodal regions of peripheral nerve.
Skin conductance and arousal in the newborn.  We measured skin conductance continuously from the sole of a foot in babies of different conceptional ages before, during, and for 10 minutes after a 'heel prick' carried out for routine blood sampling.  We studied 82 healthy babies whose gestational and postnatal ages ranged from 25-42 weeks, and 1-73 days.  The median skin conductance level (preheel prick) in babies of 40-43 weeks' conceptional age was 0.6 microS (microsiemens) and differed significantly between awake babies (1.2 microS) and those who were asleep (0.5 microS).  In contrast babies less than 40 weeks had a significantly lower median skin conductive level (0.3 microS) which was identical in awake and asleep babies.  In response to the heel prick all babies became aroused and skin conductance rose sharply and immediately in 21 out of 22 (95%) babies 40-43 weeks' conceptional age, and in seven out of 23 (30%) babies 36-39 weeks.  The median rise at one minute in babies of 40-43 weeks was significantly higher than those 36-39 weeks (2.7 microS compared with 0.5 microS).  No babies less than 36 weeks had a change in their skin conductance after the heel prick.  These results are consistent with the notion that 'emotional sweating' is a function of maturity and does not develop until 36 weeks' conceptional age.
Misdiagnosis in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.  To confirm our impression that a high percentage of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are initially misdiagnosed, we reviewed records of 33 patients with a definitive diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis seen over 10 years.  Fourteen patients (43%) were initially misdiagnosed.  Mean time to correct diagnosis was significantly greater for the misdiagnosed group (16.0 +/- 9.3 months) than for the rest of the patients (7.6 +/- 4.1 months).  Two of three patients with an initial symptom of dyspnea were misdiagnosed.  Three patients underwent laminectomies because of misdiagnosis.  Age, stage of disease, and unusual presenting symptoms were not identified as causes of misdiagnosis.  Most likely causes were physicians' failure to consider the diagnosis and lack of familiarity with the common clinical presentations of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.  Earlier diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis may help prevent medical mismanagement and may benefit patients both medically and psychologically.
Syncope and presyncope associated with probable adverse drug reactions.  The purpose of this study was to determine whether syncope and presyncope were associated with drug therapy in 70 patients referred to a tertiary care ambulatory clinic.  Drug use information was obtained, validated, and classified by its potential to cause syncope and presyncope.  Utilizing a standardized adverse drug reaction algorithm, nine (13%) of the 70 patients were rated as having probable drug-induced syncope and presyncope events.  Overall, 12 medications were implicated.  Patients with probable adverse drug reactions were older, and taking more medications, or taking an antihypertensive.  Seven of the nine patients with probable adverse drug reactions were previously classified as having syncope of unknown origin after their initial clinic evaluation.  Syncope and presyncope are commonly associated with adverse drug reactions, especially in the elderly and those taking multiple medications.
Gilles de la Tourette syndrome is not linked to D2-dopamine receptor.  Gilles de la Tourette syndrome has an important genetic component; the pathophysiology of this disorder may involve the dopamine system.  We tested a D2-dopamine receptor (locus DRD2, recognized by probe hD2G1) for genetic linkage with Gilles de la Tourette syndrome.  Using a genetic linkage map of the region of DRD2 on the long arm of chromosome 11 and restriction fragment length polymorphism data from a total of four markers (DRD2 itself, D11S84, D11S29, and PBGD), we were able to exclude linkage of this candidate gene and Gilles de la Tourette syndrome in two extended kindreds segregating for Gilles de la Tourette syndrome.  This rules out causation of Gilles de la Tourette syndrome by mutation in DRD2 in the kindreds studied under the genetic assumptions we employed; use of the map and multipoint linkage analyses also allowed us to exclude a Gilles de la Tourette syndrome susceptibility locus from a larger genetic region.
Quantitative evaluation of sway as an indicator of functional balance in post-traumatic brain injury.  The test of sway, using different conditions of stance with measurements of the average radial deviation of the center of pressure and its path length of sway per unit of time, has been shown to be a useful clinical tool in determining balance problems in traumatic brain injury (TBI) patients.  Normative values were established to determine if an individual patient's sway values fell within the normal range (mean +/- 2SD).  The tests have shown good test-retest reliability for TBI patients.  In addition, it has been shown that the sensitivity of the test is sufficient to identify changes in patients' performances as their clinical conditions change.  It has been demonstrated that the different stance conditions of the battery of tests become progressively more difficult to perform (from comfortable stance, eyes open and eyes closed, through narrow stance, eyes open and eyes closed, to tandem stance with right or left foot forward, eyes open and eyes closed).  By using these subtests, it is easy to distinguish between the performances of able-bodied patients and TBI patients with very mild balance problems.  The validity of the measure has been documented by correlating the sway performance with clinical functional performance tests.  The test performance also correlates with the patient's own assessment of his or her gait difficulties.  The limited data available suggest that the test of sway relates difficulties in static balance to the frequency of falls.  Finally, subtests permit identification of specific problems in maintaining balance as a basis for therapeutic intervention.
Screening for early dementia using memory complaints from patients and relatives.  This study examined whether the subjective impression of memory function might differentiate healthy elderly subjects from patients with memory complaints, and whether memory complaints differed between patients with and without a dementing illness.  Both self-assessment and relatives' responses on a new memory questionnaire differentiated patient groups from control subjects.  The relatives' form measuring deterioration in memory function over time identified dementing individuals from those with non-dementing causes for their memory complaints.  Factor analysis indicated that patients' memory complaints correlated with depression rather than objective memory performance, while relatives' ratings correlated with objective memory scores, not depression.  Stepwise discriminant function analyses showed that objective memory testing greatly improved specificity but not sensitivity of the subjective memory questionnaire alone.
Cerebrospinal fluid as a reflector of central cholinergic and amino acid neurotransmitter activity in cerebellar ataxia.  Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) amino acid neurotransmitters, related compounds, and their precursors, choline levels, and acetylcholinesterase activity were measured in the CSF of patients with cerebellar ataxia during a randomized, double-blind, crossover, placebo-controlled clinical trial of physostigmine salicylate.  The CSF gamma-aminobutyric acid, methionine, and choline levels, adjusted for age, were significantly lower in patients with cerebellar ataxia compared with controls.  Physostigmine selectively reduced the level of CSF isoleucine and elevated the levels of phosphoethanolamine.  No change occurred in CSF acetylcholinesterase activity and in the levels of plasma amino compounds in patients with cerebellar ataxia when compared with controls.  Median ataxia scores did not statistically differ between placebo and physostigmine nor did functional improvement occur in any of the patients.
Temporoparietal cortex in aphasia. Evidence from positron emission tomography.  Forty-four aphasic patients were examined with (F18)-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in a resting state to determine whether consistent glucose metabolic abnormalities were present.  Ninety-seven percent of subjects showed metabolic abnormalities in the angular gyrus, 89% in the supramarginal gyrus, and 87% in the lateral and transverse superior temporal gyrus.  Pearson product moment correlations were calculated between regional metabolic measures and performance on the Western Aphasia Battery.  No significant correlations were found between the Western Aphasia Battery scores and right hemisphere metabolic measures.  Most left hemisphere regions correlated with more than one score from the Western Aphasia Battery.  Temporal but not frontal regions had significant correlations to the comprehension score.  The left temporoparietal region was consistently affected in these subjects, suggesting that common features in the aphasias were caused by left temporoparietal dysfunction, while behavioral differences resulted from (1) the extent of temporoparietal changes, and (2) dysfunction elsewhere in the brain, particularly the left frontal and subcortical areas.
Neurodevelopmental outcome of children with evidence of periventricular leukomalacia on late MRI.  Fifteen children, 8 months of age or older, from a neonatal follow-up program underwent magnetic resonance imaging and neurologic, cognitive, and language evaluations.  Magnetic resonance imaging findings in all children included increased white matter signal on T2-weighted images and ventricular enlargement adjacent to regions of abnormal white matter.  The extent of degree of abnormal white matter signal and the degree of sulcal prominence were variable.  Twelve children had cerebral palsy; 5 children, 4 of whom had cerebral palsy, manifested significant sensory impairments.  The median score on cognitive testing was 89; only 2 children exhibited severe-to-profound cognitive disability.  Cognitive scores were stable on retesting.  The degree of motor disability was correlated with the extent of white matter signal abnormality; however, cognitive outcome was not related to the extent and degree of white matter signal abnormality or to the degree of sulcal prominence.  Despite the association of a major handicapping condition and periventricular leukomalacia, cognitive and language functioning may be relatively spared.
Ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging in Leigh disease.  An infant with Leigh disease, who was the younger sister of a similarly affected infant, had been examined before the onset of the disease.  Ultrasonography revealed hyperechoic lesions in the putamen and caudate nucleus during the preclinical stage.  At onset, these changes extended into the cerebral cortex and medulla.  These lesions were also detected by T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as areas of increased signal intensity.  Her brother demonstrated the same ultrasonographic results; cranial computed tomography disclosed low-density areas in the basal ganglia which were detected as hyperechoic lesions by ultrasonography.  These findings suggest that ultrasonography is useful in detecting early intracranial lesions in Leigh disease.
Rett syndrome: findings suggesting axonopathy and mitochondrial abnormalities.  We report the histopathologic findings of 3 sural nerve biopsies and 1 muscle biopsy from 3 patients with Rett syndrome.  The 3 sural nerve biopsies demonstrated a few ultrastructural abnormalities, including the presence of many Pi-granules and mitochondrial changes in the cytoplasm of Schwann cells, occasional bands of Bungner and onion-bulb formations, and mitochondrial alterations in myelinated axons.  Morphometric analysis disclosed reduction in the number of large myelinated fibers with normal densities in comparison to those of an age-matched normal control.  Light microscopic examination of the biopsied muscle from a 6-year-old patient with Rett syndrome revealed the existence of many small, dark, angulated fibers with NADH-TR staining.  Ultrastructural investigation of the muscle confirmed the presence of the dumbbell-shaped mitochondria.  Peripheral nerve involvement and the possibility of mitochondrial abnormalities in Rett syndrome were suggested by the results.
The use of obstetric analgesia in Sweden 1983-1986   The use of obstetric analgesia was investigated in a Swedish population-based prospective study of 335,207 births, which represents almost all women who had vaginal deliveries in Sweden between 1983 and 1986.  Lumbar epidural analgesia (EDA) was used in 16%, paracervical block (PCB) in 12%, pethidine or morphine in 49% and pudendal block in 62%.  All four types of analgesia were much more commonly used by nulliparae than multiparae.  Variables such as maternal age, smoking, nationality, relationship with the infant's father and gestational age had only moderate influence on the rates of different types of analgesia.  EDA and PCB were more frequently used in larger than in smaller hospitals and in the daytime than at night.  No such differences were found for pethidine or morphine, or pudendal block, which were administered routinely by midwives.
Schindler disease: the molecular lesion in the alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase gene that causes an infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy.  Schindler disease is a recently recognized infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy resulting from the deficient activity of the lysosomal hydrolase, alpha-N-acetylgalctosaminidase (alpha-GalNAc).  The recent isolation and expression of the full-length cDNA encoding alpha-GalNAc facilitated the identification of the molecular lesions in the affected brothers from family D, the first cases described with this autosomal recessive disease.  Southern and Northern hybridization analyses of DNA and RNA from the affected homozygotes revealed a grossly normal alpha-GalNAc gene structure and normal transcript sizes and amounts.  Therefore, the alpha-GalNAc transcript from an affected homozygote was reverse-transcribed, amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and sequenced.  A single G to A transition at nucleotide 973 was detected in multiple subclones containing the PCR products.  This point mutation resulted in a glutamic acid to lysine substitution in residue 325 (E325K) of the alpha-GalNAc polypeptide.  The base substitution was confirmed by dot blot hybridization analyses of PCR-amplified genomic DNA from family members with allele-specific oligonucleotides.  Furthermore, transient expression of an alpha-GalNAc construct containing the E325K mutation resulted in the expression of an immunoreactive polypeptide which had no detectable alpha-GalNAc activity.
Effect of normal MSAFP screening on maternal age for genetic amniocentesis.  Routine maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein (MSAFP) screening for neural tube defects is considered by many to be standard obstetrical care, and recently many have encouraged this test to screen for Trisomy-21 (Down's syndrome).  We questioned whether, after a normal MSAFP screen, the risk of Trisomy-21 decreases enough to warrant modifying the recommended age for genetic amniocentesis for Down's syndrome.  A logistic regression was developed which, using reported values for sensitivity and specificity for MSAFP detection of Trisomy-21 and assuming a constant threshold risk in opting for amniocentesis, indicates that genetic amniocentesis for Trisomy-21 may be deferred in some women who have a normal MSAFP screening.  Sensitivity analysis of varying thresholds for a normal MSAFP demonstrates that a 37 year old woman with a median MSAFP level has the same risk for Trisomy-21 as an unscreened women who is 4.5 years younger.  An abnormal MSAFP is useful in screening for neural tube defects and possibly for Trisomy-21.  A normal MSAFP may allow for delaying the potentially risky amniocentesis in otherwise low-risk pregnancies.
Early cerebral infarction: gadopentetate dimeglumine enhancement   Gadopentetate dimeglumine was administered prospectively to 50 patients who presented for magnetic resonance (MR) imaging within 2 weeks after a cortical cerebral infarction.  Twenty-two patients (44%) were imaged within 3 days after clinical ictus.  Abnormalities detected with gadopentetate dimeglumine enhancement were observed in 46 (92%) of 50 patients.  Classic parenchymal enhancement was a late finding, observed in all patients (17 of 17) imaged at 7-14 days after infarction.  Before this time, three additional phases of contrast material-related abnormalities were observed.  Enhancement of vessels supplying the infarct ("intravascular enhancement sign") was the earliest finding, seen in 17 (77%) of 22 infarcts aged 1-3 days.  From day 2 to day 6, abnormal enhancement of meninges adjacent to the infarct was frequently noted ("meningeal enhancement sign").  Finally, a transition phase that combined intravascular or meningeal enhancement with early parenchymal enhancement was seen from day 3 to day 6.  Gadopentetate dimeglumine-enhanced MR imaging in early stroke reveals evidence of vascular engorgement and sluggish flow, which precede the development of classic parenchymal enhancement.
Neuromuscular diseases: evaluation with high-frequency sonography.  Forty-four patients with clinically suspected neuromuscular disease and 12 healthy volunteers underwent high-frequency ultrasound examination of the rectus femoris, vastus medialis, vastus lateralis, and biceps brachii muscles, and the number of perimysial septa was determined.  These numbers and muscle/soft-tissue ratios of the lower extremity were compared.  Findings were correlated with results of muscle biopsy in all patients with suspected disease.  Using the number of perimysial septa in the lower extremity, the authors found significant differences between the muscles of healthy volunteers and those of patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophies, other muscular dystrophies, and spinal muscular atrophies: The receiver operating characteristic curve showed that an average of 12 perimysial septa within 1 cm of muscle is the ideal cutoff value to differentiate subjects without morphologic changes from those with pathologic findings.  The authors conclude that this measurement is useful for differentiation of neuromuscular diseases and may be a noninvasive, reproducible means with which to evaluate disease progression.
Cerebral blood flow velocities in the anterior cerebral arteries and basilar artery in hydrocephalus before and after treatment.  We studied Pourcelot's index (PI), which shows cerebral vascular resistance, in the anterior cerebral arteries and basilar artery, and the PI ratio (Pourcelot's index in the anterior cerebral artery/Pourcelot's index in the basilar artery) in 11 measurements of hydrocephalus.  The mean values of PI in the anterior cerebral artery, basilar artery, and the PI ratio before treatment were significantly higher than those after treatment and those in normal infants.  Before treatment, the mean PI in the anterior cerebral arteries was significantly higher than the mean PI in the basilar artery.  All PI ratios increased to 1.00 or more.  After treatment and in normal infants, the mean PI in the anterior cerebral arteries was significantly lower than the mean PI in the basilar artery.  All PI ratios decreased to less than 1.00.  We believe that the PI ratio is useful to evaluate the need or effect of treatment in hydrocephalus.
Cerebral hemodynamics in patients with normal pressure hydrocephalus: correlation between cerebral circulation time and dementia.  Regional cerebral blood flow and regional cerebral circulation time were measured in 13 demented patients with chronic hydrocephalus, mostly normal pressure hydrocephalus.  The average hemispheric, frontal, and temporal cerebral blood flows were significantly reduced.  The average regional cerebral circulation time values were significantly prolonged in the frontal, temporal, and thalamic regions, most markedly in the frontal white matter, where periventricular lucency was observed on computed tomography.  Clinical improvement was obtained in all patients after operation.  While postoperative regional cerebral blood flow values did not change compared with preoperative ones, postoperative regional cerebral circulation time values were significantly reduced in all the regions measured, and most markedly in the frontal white matter.  The present results suggest that microcirculation in the frontal lobe is closely correlated with dementia in association with pressure exerted on the nerve fibers in the frontal white matter in patients with normal pressure hydrocephalus.
Metoprolol for aggressive behavior in persons with mental retardation.  Persons with mental retardation sometimes exhibit behaviors that are difficult to control.  Use of neuroleptic medications may be limited by side effects or ineffectiveness.  Beta blockers such as propranolol and metoprolol have been shown to decrease aggressive and impulsive behaviors in some patients with mental retardation.
The deja vu experience: remembrance of things past?   The deja vu experience is a common phenomenon, occurring in pathological as well as nonpathological conditions.  It has been defined as any subjectively inappropriate impression of familiarity of a present experience with an undefined past.  The authors discuss the epidemiologic data, clinical features, and etiology of the phenomenon of deja vu.  They also review the different hypotheses on the psychopathogenesis of the deja vu experience and introduce an explanation based on the hologram as a mnestic model.
Brainstem auditory evoked response and subcortical abnormalities in autism.  Previous studies of the neurobiology of autism that have used the brainstem auditory evoked response have given contradictory results.  The authors of this study considered two supplementary aspects; they added an ipsilateral masking procedure, and they compared the results for every subject to the values (corrected for age and sex) of a large number of normal children.  Twenty autistic (according to DSM-III-R criteria) and 13 mentally retarded (nonverbal IQ less than 75) subjects were assessed.  Eighty percent of the autistic subjects had abnormal interpeak latencies, compared to 15% of the mentally retarded subjects.  The I-V and III-V prolonged interpeak latency values were seen only in the autistic subjects.  The ipsilateral masking procedure doubled the rate of detection of higher-brainstem abnormalities in the autistic children.
The UCLA-University of Utah epidemiologic survey of autism: the etiologic role of rare diseases.  Twelve rare diseases known to cause CNS pathology were found in 26 (11%) of 233 autistic probands identified during a recent epidemiologic survey of Utah.  These 26 probands had significantly lower mean IQs than the remaining patients (43 versus 60) but similar sex distribution and prevalence of abnormal EEGs and seizures.  The rarity and diversity of these 12 diseases make it highly unlikely that they randomly occurred with autism.  Their presence in this epidemiologic survey is the most compelling evidence to date to support the hypothesis that different diseases producing different types of CNS pathology can play an etiologic role in autism.
Pharmacologic treatment of noncognitive behavioral disturbances in elderly demented patients.  Fifty-nine elderly residents of long-term care facilities who had DSM-III diagnoses of dementia were studied in an 8-week randomized, double-blind comparison trial of haloperidol, oxazepam, and diphenhydramine to test the efficacy of these agents in the treatment of clinically significant behavioral disturbances in patients with dementia.  All three agents demonstrated modest but significant efficacy as measured by clinician ratings of agitated behavior and activities of daily living.  The absolute magnitude of improvement was greater for haloperidol and diphenhydramine than for oxazepam, but differences among groups did not approach statistical significance.  Frequencies of acute adverse events during the trial were similar across the drug treatment groups.  Although these drugs may differ in terms of long-term safety and efficacy, they appear to be equivalent for short-term management of agitated behavior in severely demented patients.
Rapid eye movement sleep deprivation as a probe in elderly subjects.  The effects of a 2-night rapid eye movement (REM) sleep deprivation (RSD) procedure on electroencephalographic sleep and mood were examined in 15 healthy elderly control subjects, 14 elderly patients with endogenous depression, and 15 patients with primary degenerative dementia.  Compared with control subjects, both patient groups maintained a higher amount of REM sleep time and REM activity during RSD.  Unexpectedly, depressed patients showed little rebound in visually scored or automated REM sleep measures following RSD, and they showed stability of REM activity temporal distribution from baseline to recovery conditions.  This contrasted with the rebound in REM sleep activity seen in control subjects, and the more modest increase in demented patients.  The RSD was fairly specific, with some impact on delta sleep during the procedure but not during recovery sleep.  Mood ratings were unaffected by RSD.  These findings demonstrated a greater plasticity of REM sleep regulation in the healthy elderly control subjects and suggested a higher REM "pressure" with a "ceiling effect" in depressed patients.  Patients with dementia appeared to have an impaired capacity to respond to the challenge of RSD.
Myelopathy associated with human T cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) in natal, South Africa. A clinical and investigative study in 24 patients.  Unexplained spastic myelopathy in black (Zulu) patients, similar to that seen in the tropics, has previously been described from Natal, South Africa.  Following reports linking the human T cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) to spastic myelopathy, we undertook a prospective and retrospective search for HTLV-I antibodies in 36 patients who were labelled as having unexplained myelopathy; 24 (66%) were positive and HTLV-I was isolated from 4 out of the 6 patients whose peripheral blood lymphocytes were cultured.  Eighteen (75%) gave a short history (less than 6 months).  There was a female preponderance (71%), spinothalamic dysfunction was common (55%) and as many as half were severely disabled (50% wheelchair bound).  Routine laboratory studies showed no specific trends apart from hypergammaglobulinaemia and CSF pleocytosis (greater than 5 cells/microliter in 66% of patients).  The total CSF protein was raised (greater than 0.4 g/l) in 45% of patients.  The IgG index was greater than 0.7 in 15 of 19 patients.  Conventional myelography did not show any specific abnormalities.  Computer assisted myelography was undertaken in 22 patients; 3 showed arachnoiditis and 2 spinal cord atrophy.  Periventricular lucencies were seen in 1 of 10 patients who had computed tomography of the head.  Nerve conduction studies demonstrated abnormalities in 46% of the patients indicating that subclinical peripheral nerve dysfunction was common.  Visual evoked responses were abnormal in only 1 patient but brainstem auditory evoked response studies showed some abnormality in 42% of the patients.  The finding of HTLV-I antibodies in a significant number, and the isolation of HTLV-I from the blood in 6 of our black patients with noncompressive myelopathy, represents a substantial clinical advance.  Future studies should define more clearly the role of the virus in this disorder.
Cerebral blood flow in progressive aphasia without dementia. Case report, using 133xenon inhalation, technetium 99m hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime and single photon emission computerized tomography.  We report a case of progressive aphasia without clinical signs of intellectual or behavioral impairment, satisfying Mesulam's clinical criteria of primary progressive aphasia, as 4 yrs of extensive psychometric testing and radiological imaging, comprising CT and MRI, failed to detect evidence of relevant involvement outside the left perisylvian regions.  Cranial CT was normal but MRI showed multiple bilateral lesions in the deep white matter.  Cerebral blood flow (CBF) studies by single photon emission computerized tomography, however, showed an initial frontotemporal focus of hypoperfusion that progressively extended to include most of the ipsilateral hemisphere and the contralateral frontal lobe.  This suggests that CBF imaging may yet be the most sensitive technique in revealing subclinical injury in the degenerative brain diseases of focal onset.
Innervation territories for touch and pain afferents of single fascicles of the human ulnar nerve. Mapping through intraneural microrecording and microstimulation.  The peripheral distribution of the fibre content of individual ulnar nerve fascicles supplying skin and muscles of the hand in human volunteers was indirectly mapped by tracing the fields of projected sensation evoked by intraneural electrical microstimulation (INMS) and by tracing receptive fields delineated through intraneural recording of afferent impulse activity elicited by natural stimulation of end organs.  Moderate intensity suprathreshold INMS, delivered in cutaneous fascicles, induced nonpainful sensations projecting to stereotyped and coherent areas of skin, the fascicular projected fields (FPFs).  Fascicular receptive fields (FRFs) were mapped during microneurographic recording by determining the area of skin which, when activated by light tactile stimuli, elicited afferent neural discharges recorded intraneurally.  It was found that at a given electrode position in a skin nerve fascicle, moderate intensity INMS induced nonpainful sensations projecting to a cutaneous field (FPF) that coincides with the FRF, while high intensity INMS induced painful sensations projecting within the cutaneous field of nonpainful sensations.  Pain induced by INMS in muscle nerve fascicles was projected to the muscles innervated by that fascicle and, in most instances, to areas beyond the muscular receptive field.  The study demonstrates that individual ulnar nerve fascicles, at wrist levels, subserve well-defined cutaneous territories in the hand, and that the area of skin covered by the sum of all ulnar fascicular receptive or projected fields matches the maximal possible cutaneous distribution of the ulnar nerve.  Insights of practical relevance regarding clinical expression of fascicular nerve injuries are also brought up by this study.
Volume conduction of the parietal N20 potential to the prerolandic frontal area.  Somatosensory evoked potentials were recorded from the frontal and parietal areas in patients with various lesions in the central nervous system on stimulation of the median nerve.  Five representative cases who showed a selective loss of the positive potential from the frontal area are reported.  In each case, the parietal N20 potential was relatively well preserved, and the midposition between the frontal and central areas (FC area) showed a negative potential following P14.  The peak of this negative potential was synchronous with that of the parietal N20 potential.  This negativity on the FC area is considered to be a volume conducted potential from the parietal N20 to the prerolandic frontal area.  Such an anterior volume conduction of the parietal N20 would not be explained by the concept of a tangentially oriented dipole generated in the posterior bank of the central sulcus.  Instead, for the generator of the parietal N20 potential, a radically oriented dipole generated mainly in the parietal area is postulated.
Selective spatial attention in patients with visual extinction.  The present study was designed to verify the attentional performance of patients with parietal lesions in the experimental condition in which they had to pay attention to 3 spatial positions located on the left, on the right and directly above the fixation stimulus (Experiment 1) and to only 1 of the 3 spatial positions at a time (Experiment 2).  Twelve patients (6 subjects with right parietal lesions and 6 subjects without neurological deficits) participated in the experiment.  The results of Experiment 1 showed that in patients with right parietal lesions the speed and accuracy of response to horizontally aligned stimuli increased gradually from right to left, whereas the control group showed only the effect due to the different retinal eccentricities of the 3 stimuli, that is, responses to central stimuli were faster and more accurate than responses to left and right stimuli.  The results of Experiment 2 showed that both the neurological and control groups were faster to respond to central than to left and right stimuli, and that the neurological group was faster to respond to right than left stimuli, whereas no difference in RTs between two visual fields was obtained in the control group.  Furthermore, when the patients had to respond to 3 spatial locations aligned horizontally (Experiment 1), the speed and accuracy of response to the right stimulus were the same as when they had to focus attention on it (Experiment 2).  These results showed that the focus of attention in patients with visual extinction is on the rightmost stimulus and that the increased attention to the right is accompanied by a decreased attention to the left.
Osseointegration of titanium implants in total hip arthroplasty.  Osseointegration is defined as direct contact on the light microscopic level between living bone tissue and the implant.  Using titanium screw dental implants in the jaw, a lasting interface under loaded conditions extending over a 20-year follow-up period has been demonstrated.  This demonstration brings up the question whether a similar interface can be achieved in total hip arthroplasty (THA) between living bone and a titanium alloy implant under necessitated conditions of immediate loading.  Two series of cases are reported.  The first series used a femoral, press-fit, titanium alloy component and the second used a press-fit titanium acetabular component and redesigned femoral, press-fit, titanium alloy component.  Both demonstrated a high percentage of good to excellent results.  Roentgenograms showed that the geometrical changes in the redesigned femoral component gave early indications of a better fixation with loading in valgus, less subsidence, and less evidence of distal stress transfer.  A two-and-one-half-year postoperative anatomic specimen study confirmed osseointegration to the press-fit titanium alloy femoral component.  Multiple areas of contact between bone and metal without fibrous interposition were seen.  Examination by electron microscopy supported the light microscopic findings.  These findings support further use of smooth, press-fit titanium components in THAs without the need for porous coating, mesh, or other surface modifications.
Intraoperative dexamethasone irrigation in lumbar microdiskectomy.  In 45 lumbar hemilaminectomy/microdiskectomy patients, a control group of 23 patients had the standard operative procedure.  The remaining 22 patients were treated with intraoperative irrigation of long-acting dexamethasone before incision closure.  Age, weight, gender ratio, mean postoperative hospital stay, mean in-hospital narcotics usage, and incidence of perioperative complications among the two groups were compared.  Age and gender ratios were comparable, although the control group was significantly heavier in body weight than the steroid-irrigated group.  The steroid-irrigated group had a significant reduction in hospitalization and a marked reduction in narcotics usage compared with the control group.  Postoperative fever occurred in one patient in the steroid group.  The control group had three postoperative complications.  These preliminary observations suggest that dexamethasone irrigation during lumbar diskectomy is a safe and effective adjunct to surgical management.
Continuous removal of middle molecules by hemofiltration in patients with acute liver failure.  In patients with acute liver failure and hepatic coma, an increase in the abnormal "middle molecules" seen on the chromatograms of the sera is suspected of playing an etiologic role in the coma.  A pilot study of continuous hemofiltration using a high-performance membrane was conducted in 16 such patients in an attempt to decrease the serum levels of the middle molecules.  The procedure was used alternately with plasma exchange.  High-performance liquid chromatography showed a notable removal of the substances in the filtrates and a sequential removal from the serum by hemofiltration.  Eight (50%) of the 16 patients had amelioration in level of consciousness and were weaned successfully from hemofiltration.  Although only three of the 16 patients survived the acute illness, 13 others lived an average of 15 days and five patients survived greater than 3 wk.  While the continuous removal of middle molecules from the serum may not reverse liver failure, this procedure used in conjunction with plasma exchange may provide a means of life support, e.g., for patients awaiting a liver transplant.
A limited diagnostic investigation for obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Oximetry and static charge sensitive bed.  A simplified sleep apnea investigation consisting of combined oximetry and respiration movement monitoring was compared with conventional polysomnography.  These two types of recordings were performed simultaneously during one night in 77 patients with suspected obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS).  A static charge sensitive bed (SCSB) was used in the simplified recording because it provides a comfortable and reliable means of recording respiration movements.  Periods of obstructive apneas gave a diamond-shaped periodic respiration movement pattern in the SCSB, usually accompanied by repetitive oxygen desaturations.  The average number of desaturations greater than or equal to 4 percent per sleeping hour was termed the oxygen desaturation index (ODI) and compared with the apnea index (AI).  In the whole population they were well correlated (p less than 0.0001, R2 = 0.41), but in individual cases there were considerable discrepancies.  Patients with periodic respiration movements less than 18 percent of total sleeping time and ODI less than 2 never had AI greater than or equal to 5, whereas patients with periodic respiration greater than 45 percent and ODI greater than 6 always had AI greater than or equal to 5.  Fifty-one of the 77 patients fulfilled these criteria.  A bradycardia response to apneas was absent in 29 percent of patients with AI greater than or equal to 5.  A combination of respiration movement and oximetry recording thus seems to give sufficient information to confirm or negate a diagnosis of OSAS in a majority of patients with clinical symptoms.  In borderline patients, further investigations should be performed.
Maxillofacial surgery and nasal CPAP. A comparison of treatment for obstructive sleep apnea syndrome   Nasal continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is the primary therapy for obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS).  Recent reports have indicated, however, that there is a small but significant number of failures related to patient compliance.  Primary surgical treatment, which has been uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP), has declined because of poor results.  A reviewed of UPPP failures has shown that while UPPP eliminated palatal obstruction, it failed to eliminate base of tongue obstruction.  Maxillofacial surgery has been reported as treatment of OSAS by correcting base of tongue obstruction.  Thirty patients with severe OSAS were evaluated to compare nasal CPAP and maxillofacial surgery.  The goal was to determine if our surgical protocol was as effective as nasal CPAP.  All patients initially underwent baseline diagnostic polysomnography to document OSAS.  A nasal CPAP study was performed to determine the appropriate positive end-expiratory pressure.  The patients in this study were using nasal CPAP, but they found it unacceptable as long-term treatment and elected surgery.  Maxillofacial surgery consisted of maxillary, mandibular, and hyoid advancement.  Polysomnography was performed six months following surgery and compared with the night 2 CPAP results.  The parameters included in the investigation were the respiratory disturbance index (RDI), lowest SaO2, number of SaO2 falls below 90 percent, total sleep time (TST), REM sleep percent, stage 3-4 sleep percent, and wake after sleep onset.  The mean RDI before treatment was 72.0 (SD 25.7).  After completing therapy, the RDI from surgery and CPAP was 8.8 (SD 6.0) and 8.6 (SD 4.1), respectively.  The mean low SaO2 prior to treatment was 61.0 (SD 13.5), and the CPAP results and postsurgical results were 86.2 (SD 5.5) and 86.1 (SD 4.2), respectively.  An analysis of variance was used to examine the results, and there was no statistical difference between nasal CPAP and surgery for all respiratory variables.
Lack of change in neurochemical markers during the postepileptic phase of intrahippocampal tetanus toxin syndrome in rats.  The chronic epileptic syndrome induced by injecting tetanus toxin into rat hippocampus causes functional changes that essentially are permanent, outlasting the period of active seizures by at least 1 year.  These long-term changes have been characterized by an impaired performance on a range of behavioral tasks, which in turn have been associated with a physiologic depression of hippocampal evoked responses but not with any discernible histopathology.  In the present study, we examined the hippocampi of rats in the postseizure phase of the tetanus toxin model and observed no significant changes in the concentration of neurochemical markers for six neurotransmitters.  Therefore, the long-term reduction in hippocampal excitability cannot be attributed to any major loss of afferents or hippocampal neurons using aspartate, acetylcholine, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), glutamate, norepinephrine (NE), or serotonin as their transmitters.
Some endorphin derivatives and hydrocortisone prevent EEG limbic seizures induced by corticotropin-releasing factor in rabbits.  Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) injected into the cerebral ventricles of small mammals induces EEG limbic seizures, behavioral excitability, stereotyped behavior, and tardive enhancement of hippocampal theta voltage and frequency.  Because we addressed this phenomenon when we explained the pathogenesis of infantile spasms in children, we wished to study the interference exerted by some gamma-endorphin fragments on EEG epileptiform and behavioral symptoms induced by CRF in the rabbit.  Animals were implanted intracerebroventricularly (i.c.v.) with semichronic cortical and hippocampal electrodes, together with a cannula into the left lateral ventricle.  When some gamma-endorphin derivatives (DT gamma E, DE gamma E) were injected intravenously (i.v.) for 4 days (or hydrocortisone once), they prevented the EEG ictal seizures induced in the hippocampus of rabbits by CRF injected i.c.v.  Hydrocortisone and DE gamma E also prevented the appearance of scattered spiking and partially prevented tardive enhancement of theta voltage in the hippocampal EEG.  Finally, DE gamma E also prevented stereotyped behavior and excitability induced by CRF.  These results confirm the regulatory role exerted by CRF in limbic structure excitability and suggest that the above peptides may be involved in a regulatory feedback mechanism of CRF metabolism or activity.  The possibility that these peptides may also have interesting antiepileptogenic properties should be considered.
Neonatal monosodium glutamate abolishes corticotropin-releasing factor-induced epileptogenic activity in rats.  Intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) injection of rat corticotropin-releasing factor (rCRF) at doses of 5-20 micrograms in rats induces epileptogenic activity characterized by pacemaker-like spikes localized in the hippocampal leads.  Such an effect was still present in rats neonatally treated with saline but was absent in those neonatally treated with monosodium glutamate (MSG), a treatment that caused marked changes in the concentration of several brain neurotransmitters and neuropeptides in hypothalamic nuclei where CRF is highly concentrated and is believed to induce endocrinologic and behavioral effects.  The present results suggest the rCRF-induced spiking activity is mediated by activation of neuronal pathways sensitive to MSG neurotoxic effect.
Triiodothyronine and brain excitability.  We investigated mechanisms involved in thyroid hormone action on brain excitability.  The effect of acute exposure of triiodothyronine (T3) to rat hippocampal slices in vitro was studied.  No significant changes could be detected in prevolley, field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSP) and population spike amplitude, while there was a minor, nonsignificant trend toward shortening of the population spike latency time.  T3 had no effect on penicillin-induced epileptiform activity.  There was, however, an active accumulation of radioactively labeled T3 in the slices.  A rat cervaux-isole preparation was used to determine focal seizure thresholds in the visual cortex, and no acute (2-4 h) effects were demonstrated.  No significant acute effects of T3 on brain excitability in the hippocampus and visual cortex was observed, despite an active accumulation of T3.  Thus, the effect of T3 on brain excitability most likely is due to delayed effects.
Electrocorticographic confirmation of focal positron emission tomographic abnormalities in children with intractable epilepsy.  The relationship between focal disturbances of glucose utilization demonstrated by positron emission tomography (PET) and electrophysiologic abnormalities defined by intraoperative electrocorticography (ECoG) was studied in eight children (aged 13 months to 12 years) who underwent cortical resection because of intractable seizures.  None of the children had pure temporal lobe epilepsy.  Computed tomography (CT) and/or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were normal in four of the eight children.  The scalp electroencephalogram (EEG) showed lateralized interictal epileptiform abnormalities in all eight and lateralized ictal onset in five of eight.  In seven children, interictal PET showed focal hypometabolism; the eighth child had focal, ictal hypermetabolism.  ECoG at the time of surgery showed epileptiform spiking, slowing, and/or suppression of normal background activity that in every case corresponded to the focus on PET scan.  The ECoG findings support the notion that in children with epilepsy focal metabolic abnormalities on PET correspond to electrophysiologically abnormal areas of cortex, which are presumably also the epileptogenic regions.  Such areas can appear normal on anatomic imaging studies (CT and MRI).  When ictal scalp EEG data are ambiguous or contradictory, PET provides a less invasive means than chronic grid or depth electrode recording for evaluating whether a localized epileptogenic area exists.
Lateralized effects of subclinical epileptiform EEG discharges on scholastic performance in children.  The interaction between lateralization of subclinical epileptiform discharges and cognitive tasks was investigated in 21 children (12 girls and 9 boys, mean age 10.6 years).  Seventeen had a diagnosis of epilepsy (partial or secondarily generalized).  Testing was by reading, arithmetic, and intelligence subtests during continuous telemetric EEG and video monitoring.  Children with left-sided discharges had significantly lower reading performance than children with right-sided discharges.  During reading, epileptiform discharges occurred relatively less frequently and with a shorter total duration over the left hemisphere than the right.  This supports the view that cognitive tasks suppress epileptiform discharges when they activate a region of the brain within the epileptogenic zone.  Discharges from other epileptogenic zones not directly activated by the tasks are increased, however.
Glucocorticoid-induced muscle atrophy prevention by exercise in fast-twitch fibers.  Exercise has been shown to be effective in preventing glucocorticoid-induced atrophy in muscles containing high proportions of type II or fast-twitch fibers.  This investigation was undertaken to further evaluate this response in type IIa and IIb fibers, determined by histochemical staining for myofibrillar adenosinetriphosphatase with alkaline and acid preincubation.  Steroid [cortisol acetate (CA), 100 mg/kg body wt] and exercise (running 90 min/day, 29 m/min) treatments were initiated simultaneously for 11 consecutive days in female rats.  Fiber distribution and area measurements were performed in a deep and superficial region of plantaris muscle.  The exercise regimen spared approximately 40% of the CA-induced plantaris muscle atrophy.  In the deep region, the fiber population, which contained approximately 13% type I (slow-twitch), 24% type IIa, and 63% IIb fibers, was not affected by either treatment.  In the superficial section, which consisted solely of type II fibers, the proportion of type IIa fibers was higher (27 vs.  9%, P less than 0.01) in the steroid- than in the vehicle-treated groups.  Within each region, type IIa fibers were less susceptible to atrophy than type IIb fibers, and within each fiber type, the deep region had less atrophy than the superficial region.  Type I fibers were unchanged by steroid treatment.  For type IIa fibers, exercise prevented 100% of the atrophy in the deep region and 50% in the superficial region.  For type IIb fibers, the activity spared 67 and 40% of the atrophy in these same regions, respectively.  These results show that glucocorticoids are capable of changing the myosin phenotype.
Disturbance in daily sleep/wake patterns in patients with cognitive impairment and decreased daily activity.  The sleep/wake patterns of 121 chronically ill, mentally and physically handicapped patients were visually monitored hourly for 14 consecutive days.  Four types of sleep/wake patterns were found.  In order to investigate how cognitive and physical functions correlated with sleep disorders, patients were classified based on a scale of mental function and the grading of daily activity.  The percent of total sleep hours and the sleep rating, showing disturbances in sleep/wake pattern, were evaluated.  We found a high degree of individuality in sleep/wake patterns.  Sleep disturbance was associated with daily activity as well as with cognitive impairment.  This monitoring system provides medical personnel with valuable information for clinical management.
What practicing physicians in North Carolina rate as their most challenging geriatric medicine concerns.  We recently surveyed a random sample of 500 physicians in family practice, general practice, and internal medicine in North Carolina, to discover their most challenging geriatric concerns.  Using a three-stage survey technique, respondents were asked to answer two open-ended questions about the most challenging geriatric problems they face and what specific geriatric content areas would attract their participation in an educational program.  They were then asked to rank 34 topics on which they would like more information.  A total of 242 responses were received for a 55% response rate (63 of the 500 were undeliverable).  Responses indicated that physicians are more concerned with management than diagnosis and revealed considerable evidence of empathy and concern.  The top three topics had to do with the management of dementia, multiple problems, and depression.  Approximately 25% of physicians consider problems of financing health care as among the most challenging problems.
Delirium: masquerades and misdiagnosis in elderly inpatients.  Delirium is an organic mental disorder defined as transient, fluctuating global dysfunction of cognition.  It is common in elderly medical inpatients, yet its varied presentation is often missed or misdiagnosed.
Multiple muscle enzyme release with psychiatric illness.  Associations (p less than .001) between serum concentrations of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) were observed in physically well patients with mania (N = 100, r = .70), depression (N = 138, r = .51), chronic schizophrenia (N = 85, r = .68), and schizoaffective or atypical psychosis (N = 39, r = .52) discharged from 1978 through 1981.  In contrast, there was a negligible association between these enzymes in 90 nonpsychiatric inpatient control subjects.  Patients with mania (229.0 +/- 106.1 IU/l) showed significantly (t = 3.16, p less than .002, two-tailed) higher lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels than control subjects (191 +/- 41.7 IU/l) and a 14% incidence of abnormally high serum LDH levels vs.  1% among control subjects.  Results were unchanged when patients taking neuroleptics were excluded.  These results indicate that psychiatric illness, especially mania, induces release of LDH and SGOT, occasionally to unusually high levels.  This is similar to previous reports of muscle creatine phosphokinase release in psychiatric patients.  Presumably, these enzymes are released from skeletal muscle in association with agitation, with muscle tension, or with blood stasis and local tissue hypoxia consequent to hypoactivity.
Infarction in the territory of the medial branch of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery.  We report 10 cases of cerebellar infarction in the territory of the medial branch of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (mPICA).  Axial sections on MRI through the middle of the medulla and the cerebellum showed the infarction as a triangular area with a dorsal base and a ventral apex directed towards the fourth ventricle.  The infarct also involved the lateral and dorsal medulla when the mPICA supplied all or part of these regions.  Three clinical patterns were observed: 1) pseudolabyrinthine signs with or without dysmetria and ataxia when the medulla was spared; marked axial lateropulsion was present in most cases; 2) complete or incomplete Wallenberg's syndrome, when the medulla was involved; 3) silent infarction.  These syndromes are precisely those previously attributed to PICA occlusion without distinction of the branch involved.  No alteration of consciousness was recorded and spontaneous recovery was the rule.  Cerebellar infarction in the distribution of the mPICA can be regarded as a benign condition with a good prognosis.
Motor unit discharge characteristics and short term synchrony in paraplegic humans.  Frequency of firing and regularity of discharge of human motor units, and short term synchrony between pairs of motor units, have been assessed in extensor digitorum communis (EDC) and tibialis anterior (TA) muscles in control subjects and in clinically complete paraplegic subjects.  The discharge pattern of TA motor units in paraplegia ranged from extremely regular to very irregular for different motor units whereas in the control population, and in EDC of both groups, there was a narrow, but intermediate, range of regularity.  There was little difference in the incidence and degree of short term synchrony (STS) in EDC between paraplegic and normal subjects.  In contrast, virtually no STS of motor units was observed in the TA muscles of the paraplegic group whereas control subjects exhibited approximately the same amount of STS in their TA and EDC muscles.  It is concluded that the extra burden placed on arm muscles in paraplegia does not change the amount of synchronisation between motor units.  Furthermore, section of the spinal cord does not increase STS as predicted from lesions of the reticulospinal tract in cats.  This may reflect the coincidental removal of supraspinal synchronising inputs of motoneurons or the reorganisation of synaptic inputs in chronic paraplegia.
Involvement of the central nervous system in chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy: a clinical, electrophysiological and magnetic resonance imaging study.  In a consecutive series of 30 patients with chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) minor clinical evidence of CNS involvement was found in five.  Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed in 28 and revealed abnormalities consistent with demyelination in nine patients aged less than 50 years and abnormalities in five aged 50 years or over.  Measurements of central motor conduction time (CMCT) were obtained in 18 and showed unilateral or bilateral abnormalities in six.  It is concluded that subclinical evidence of central nervous system (CNS) involvement is common, at least in patients with CIDP in the United Kingdom, but that clinically evident signs of CNS disease are infrequent.  The association of a multiple sclerosis-like syndrome with CIDP is rare.
Long-term potentiation of electrotonic coupling at mixed synapses.  Long-term potentiation of chemical synapses is closely related to memory and learning.  Studies of this process have concentrated on chemically mediated excitatory synapses.  By contrast, activity-dependent modification of gap junctions, which also widely exist in higher structures such as hippocampus and neocortex, has not been described.  Here we report that at mixed synapses between sensory afferents and an identified reticulospinal neuron, the electrotonic coupling potential can be potentiated, as well as the chemically mediated excitatory postsynaptic potential, for a prolonged time period using a stimulation paradigm like that which produces long-term potentiation in hippocampus.  The effect on coupling is due to an increase in gap-junctional conductance.  Our data indicate that the potentiation of both synaptic components requires an increase in intracellular calcium, involves activation of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors, and is specific to the tetanized pathway.
Indications for thymectomy in myasthenia gravis.  Fifty-six board-certified neurologists with interest and expertise in myasthenia completed a survey of indications for thymectomy in myasthenia gravis.  Thymectomy was advocated for virtually all patients with thymoma, for a variable subset of patients with generalized myasthenia without thymoma, and occasionally for selected patients with disabling ocular myasthenia.
Phenotypic heterogeneity of spinal muscular atrophy mapping to chromosome 5q11.2-13.3 (SMA 5q).  We made phenotypic analysis of 14 families with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) linking to chromosome 5q11.2-13.3 (SMA 5q), and 2 that may not map to this locus, to assess clinical symptoms among SMA families known to result from mutation at the identical gene/locus.  Although the current number of families is still small, the correlation of clinical phenotype and molecular genotype supports 2 observations.  First, SMA mutations at the 5q locus present with a broad continuum of clinical abnormalities, and 2nd, the single clearly unlinked family presents with an unusual phenotype characterized by relatively late onset and early death.  Thus, there are as yet no unambiguous cases of typical SMA families that are clearly unlinked to the locus at 5q-ie, no clear cases of nonallelic heterogeneity.  Analysis of SMA 5q families supports the view that, with certain exceptions, there is little phenotypic intrafamilial variability.  When families were ranked by severity of disease there was a strong correlation with age of onset.  Onset within the 1st few months was associated with early death, but not in all cases.  With rare exception, onset after 1 year of age was associated with less severe disease and greater longevity.
Routine and quantitative EEG analysis in Gilles de la Tourette's syndrome.  Gilles de la Tourette's syndrome (GdlT) is a neurobehavioral disorder, with a reportedly high frequency of EEG abnormalities.  We performed EEGs on 48 consecutive patients with GdlT, and frequency analysis in 26 patients (17 males), and compared the results with those from age- and sex-matched normal controls.  Routine 18-channel EEG revealed minimal diffuse nonspecific slowing in only 3 of 48 patients (6%) and in 2 of 26 controls (7.7%).  The frequency analysis of the EEG of the 26 GdlT patients and their normal controls showed similar brain activity.  We conclude that no significant differences exist between the EEG activity in GdlT patients as compared with that in sex- and age-matched controls in routine as well as in quantitative EEG.
Deteriorating ischemic stroke: risk factors and prognosis.  To determine a risk profile of deterioration in cerebral infarction of less than 8 hours' duration, we studied prospectively a series of clinical and radiologic data in 98 patients.  We evaluated the Canadian Neurological Scale Score and Barthel index during a follow-up period of 3 months.  There was deterioration in the 1st 48 hours in 40.8% of the patients.  High systolic blood pressure, elevated blood sugar concentration at admission, and carotid territory involvement were independently related with deterioration in the logistic regression analysis.  Death occurred in 35% of the patients with deteriorating infarcts and in 8.6% of those with stable infarcts.  At the end of the study, functional capacity was lower in those with deteriorating infarcts, but the 2 groups improved in parallel from the 4th day onward.
Infantile CNS spongy degeneration--14 cases: clinical update.  We studied 14 Arab infants with infantile spongy degeneration, 13 of whom were products of consanguineous marriages.  They presented in infancy with macrocephaly, poor visual behavior or blindness, and axial hypotonia with appendicular spasticity.  Brain CT and MRI showed diffuse symmetric leukoencephalopathy, even before neurologic symptoms.  There were relatively normal EEGs.  The visual evoked responses (P100) were either absent or delayed early in the course.  The brainstem auditory evoked responses showed milder abnormalities, with loss of later components before the earlier ones.  Deficient aspartoacylase activity in cultured fibroblasts or brain biopsy confirmed the diagnosis in all patients.
Dominantly inherited apathy, central hypoventilation, and Parkinson's syndrome: clinical, biochemical, and neuropathologic studies of 2 new cases.  We describe 2 new patients from a family in which 10 persons in 3 successive generations had a dominant neuropsychiatric disorder characterized by apathy, central hypoventilation, and parkinsonism.  Neuropathologically, both patients showed severe neuronal loss and reactive gliosis in the substantia nigra.  Neurochemical studies showed a marked depletion of dopamine in substantia nigra, putamen, and caudate nucleus, as well as reduction in serotonin content in the substantia nigra.  Glutamate contents were low in frontal cortex and thalamus, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) contents were low in thalamus and substantia nigra of both patients.  In addition, phosphoethanolamine contents were reduced in all brain regions of both patients, especially in the substantia nigra.  One patient with severe symptoms had low levels of homovanillic acid, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, and GABA in his CSF repeatedly for 3 years before death (aged 58), while the 2nd patient died (aged 51) of an unrelated cause before developing any symptoms of the familial disorder.  Because brain deficiencies of multiple neurotransmitters appear to be involved, this disorder is unlikely to respond to treatment; however, neurochemical studies of CSF may make presymptomatic diagnosis feasible.
Study of verbal description in neuropathic pain.  The aim of this paper is to study the quality of verbal description and its diagnostic value in neuropathic pain.  The verbal description of pain as assessed by a French adjective list questionnaire (QDSA) is compared between a group of 100 patients with neuropathic pain and a mixed group of 97 chronic benign and cancer non-neuropathic pain patients.  Seventeen descriptors of the 61 QDSA descriptors have a significant intergroup frequency difference.  By principal component analysis and Varimax rotation of the intercorrelation matrix of descriptors in the neuropathic group.  7 factors accounting for 66.0% of the total variance are derived.  Six factors reflect purely sensory or affective aspects of the pain experience.  Seven descriptors from the discriminant analysis function correctly assign 77% of neuropathic pain patients and 81% of the non-neuropathic pain patients.  In a second neuropathic pain group of 32 patients, the discriminant function coefficient permits correct diagnostic categorization in 66% of the cases.  Implications for clinical practice and trials are discussed.
Quantitative evaluation of hypnotically suggested hyperaesthesia and analgesia by painful laser stimulation.  The ability to reduce both clinically and experimentally induced pain by hypnotic suggestion of analgesia is well known.  However, the nature of hypnotic analgesia still remains uncertain.  Attempts to demonstrate and identify specific psychophysiological mechanisms have, so far, been unsatisfactory.  Methodological problems in inducing pain and monitoring physiological responses may be the reason for this lack of success.  In the present study, we have attempted to eliminate some of these methodological problems.  The sensory and pain thresholds to laser stimulation were determined, and the laser-evoked brain potentials were measured for 8 highly hypnotically susceptible subjects in 3 conditions: (1) waking state, (2) suggestion of hyperaesthesia, (3) suggestion of analgesia.  The thresholds were reduced during induced hyperaesthesia and increased during analgesia.  During hyperaesthesia sensations could be evoked by laser intensities which were below intensities that could be perceived in the awake state.  The amplitude of the evoked brain potentials increased during hyperaesthesia and decreased during analgesia.  The latency of the potential remained constant.  The perception of pain during hypnosis can change very fast, indicating that slow endogenous mechanisms may play only a minor role in suggested hyperaesthesia/analgesia.
Antinociceptive interaction between opioids and medetomidine: systemic additivity and spinal synergy.  The antinociceptive interaction on the tail flick (TF) and hot plate (HP) tests between opioid analgesics and medetomidine after intravenous (iv) or intrathecal administration were examined by isobolographic analysis.  Male Sprague-Dawley rats received fixed ratios of medetomidine to morphine, fentanyl, and meperidine of 1:10 and 1:30, 10:1, and 1:3, respectively, by iv administration or 10:1, 3:1 and 10:1, and 1:3 by intrathecal administration, respectively.  Data were expressed as the percentage maximal possible effect (%MPE).  The A50 (dose producing 50% MPE) for each drug or drug combination was determined from the dose-response curve.  Isobolographic analysis revealed that the effect of medetomidine combined with fentanyl, morphine, or meperidine was additive after iv administration.  The intrathecal administration of combinations of medetomidine with the opioids produced a synergistic antinociceptive effect in the TF but not HP test.  These data confirmed that the interaction between medetomidine and opioids in producing antinociception may be additive or synergistic, depending on the route of administration, drug ratio administered, and level of processing of the nociceptive input (i.e., spinal vs.  supraspinal).  Moreover, these results were consistent with a spinal role for alpha-2 adrenoceptors in mediating antinociception.  The authors suggest that the interaction between the opioid and alpha-2 adrenergic receptors occurs within the spinal cord.
Survey of adolescents with severe intellectual handicap.  A diagnostic survey was undertaken of children aged 11 to 19 years in Tameside with severe learning difficulties (intelligence quotient less than or equal to 50).  Eighty-two children were identified and their medical records reviewed.  A specific diagnosis for the retardation was documented in 25 (30%) of the children, 18 of whom had Down's syndrome.  A probable aetiology or a disorder of unknown aetiology had been identified in a further 21 (26%) children.  To confirm the existing diagnosis, identify new diagnoses, and offer genetic counselling, the parents of 63 children were offered detailed reassessment of their child.  Fifty three children were reviewed, and a specific disorder identified in 25 out of 31 previously undiagnosed children.  The most frequent diagnoses made were fragile X syndrome and Rett's syndrome.  On completion of the survey, 61 of the 82 children (74%) had a specific diagnosis or probable aetiology identified, 12 (15%) had associated disorders such as cerebral palsy, and in only nine of the 82 children (11%) were there no clues at all to the cause of their retardation.
Quantitative assessment of extradural bupivacaine analgesia.  Bupivacaine (0.5%) 20 ml was administered extradurally to six healthy volunteers.  It was found that simultaneous application of 10 needles to the skin could evoke pain when analgesia was obtained to one needle stimulation.  In addition, a laser beam was used as a quantitative technique to activate simultaneously many cutaneous nociceptors.  For 7 h, thresholds (sensory and pain) and pain-evoked brain potentials (amplitude and latency) to laser stimulation were monitored and used for quantitative assessment of onset, efficacy and duration of analgesia at various dermatomes (C7, T8, T10, T12, L1, L3, S1).  The onset time of analgesia was shortest and conduction delay longest at the dermatome related to the site of injection (L3).  Full analgesia was obtained at L1, L3 and S1, although the peak efficacy at S1 was delayed for 120-180 min after injection.  A minor effect was found at dermatome C7 approximately 60 min after injection.
Onset phase of spinal bupivacaine analgesia assessed quantitatively by laser stimulation.  Analgesia was assessed quantitatively at various dermatomes (C7, T8, T10, T12, L1, L3, S1) for the first 30 min after subarachnoid administration of 0.5% bupivacaine 3.5 ml.  Stimulation with 10 needles and laser stimulation could evoke pain in dermatomes with adequate analgesia to single needle stimulation.  Analgesia was assessed by thresholds (sensory and pain) and by pain-related brain potentials (amplitude and latency) to laser stimulation.  Little analgesia was found at T10, but it increased gradually towards caudal segments.  The dermatome related to the site of the injection (L3) was not blocked to a greater extent than the surrounding dermatomes.  Conduction time (the latency of the evoked brain potential) was increased relatively more from the S1 dermatome compared with L1.
Codeine increases pain thresholds to copper vapor laser stimuli in extensive but not poor metabolizers of sparteine.  The analgesic efficacy and kinetics of a single oral dose of 75 mg codeine was investigated in 12 extensive metabolizers and 12 poor metabolizers of sparteine in a double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover study.  The cosegregation of the O-demethylation of codeine to morphine with the sparteine oxidation polymorphism was confirmed.  Hence morphine could not be detected in the plasma of any of the poor metabolizers, whereas detectable morphine plasma levels were found in 10 of 12 extensive metabolizers.  Pain thresholds to laser stimuli were determined before drug intake and 90, 150, and 210 minutes after drug intake.  Codeine significantly increased the pricking pain thresholds in the extensive metabolizers (p less than 0.05), whereas there were no significant changes in the poor metabolizers.  No change in pain thresholds occurred with placebo in any of the two phenotypes.  In the extensive metabolizers there was a significant positive correlation between the increase in pain threshold and plasma concentration of codeine.  The study supports the hypothesis that morphine formation is essential for achievement of analgesia during codeine treatment.
Changes in thermal and mechanical pain thresholds in hand amputees. A clinical and physiological long-term follow-up.  In a previous study, allodynia to cold and vibratory stimuli was found in the finger stumps of 24 patients with amputations, control values being obtained from fingers of the intact contralateral hand.  When treated with regional intravenous guanethidine block (RGB), some of the patients only had short-lasting relief of symptoms, whereas others experienced a more long-lasting beneficial effect.  In the present long-term follow-up study the patients were re-examined 6 years after the RGB treatment.  The aim was to investigate whether the earlier symptoms and signs persisted, and whether there were any differences in these respects, between patients with long-lasting (group 1) and short-lasting relief of symptoms after RGB (group 2).  All 24 patients were asked to answer a questionnaire concerning their clinical symptoms.  In addition, 14 of them visited the laboratory for determination of thermal and vibration-induced pain thresholds.  Comparisons were made with values obtained at the first examination before RGB treatment and with values from 14 healthy subjects tested in a similar way on 2 occasions with an interval of 8 years.  Twenty of 23 patients reported that cold exposure still evoked stump pain.  However, the threshold measurements showed that with time the patients had become more tolerant to thermal stimuli not only in the injured but also in the uninjured hand.  A rise in pain threshold was also observed when vibration-induced pain was tested in the injured hand.  There was no significant difference between groups 1 and 2.  Similar changes in pain thresholds with time were not observed in the group of healthy control subjects.
Health locus of control, gender differences and adjustment to persistent pain.  Locus of control (LOC) beliefs, long thought important in adjustment to persistent pain, were studied among 160 subjects (67 males and 93 females) referred to a comprehensive pain rehabilitation program.  The subscale structure of the Multidimensional Health Locus of Control (MHLC) was factorially replicated in our sample.  Three unique MHLC profile clusters were identified for both males and females.  Among men, cluster assignment was related to age only.  The younger male patients reported a stronger internal attributional style.  Older male patients relied more heavily on both chance and powerful other factors.  Among women, cluster assignment was related to the use of coping strategies.  For example, patients with high internal scores only, reflecting a strong internal orientation towards self-management of health care needs, were more likely to utilize Information-Seeking, Self-Blame, and Threat Minimization coping strategies than patients with high scores on both the Internal and Powerful Other factors.  It appears that the presence of both Internal and Powerful Other health attributional styles is associated with less frequent use of cognitive self-management techniques.  In understanding the LOC scores it is important to rely on pattern analysis of scores.  Implications for clinical treatment are discussed.
Neonatal facial and cry responses to invasive and non-invasive procedures.  Evaluation of pain in neonates is difficult due to their limited means of communication.  The aim was to determine whether behavioural reactions of cry and facial activity provoked by an invasive procedure could be discriminated from responses to non-invasive tactile events.  Thirty-six healthy full-term infants (mean age 2.2 h) received 3 procedures in counterbalanced order: intramuscular injection, application of triple dye to the umbilical stub, and rubbing thigh with alcohol.  Significant effects of procedure were found for total face activity and latency to face movement.  A cluster of facial actions comprised of brow bulging, eyes squeezed shut, deepening of the naso-labial furrow and open mouth was associated most frequently with the invasive procedure.  Comparisons between the 2 non-invasive procedures showed more facial activity to thigh swabbing and least to application of triple dye to the umbilical cord.  Acoustic analysis of cry showed statistically significant differences across procedures only for latency to cry and cry duration for the group as a whole.  However, babies who cried to two procedures showed higher pitch and greater intensity to the injection.  There were no significant differences in melody, dysphonation, or jitter.  Methodological difficulties for investigators in this area were examined, including criteria for the selection of cries for analysis, and the logical and statistical challenges of contrasting cries induced by different conditions when some babies do not always cry.  It was concluded that facial expression, in combination with short latency to onset of cry and long duration of first cry cycle typifies reaction to acute invasive procedures.
Characterization of descending inhibition and facilitation from the nuclei reticularis gigantocellularis and gigantocellularis pars alpha in the rat.  Descending influences on the spinal nociceptive tail-flick (TF) reflex produced by focal electrical stimulation and glutamate microinjection in the nuclei reticularis gigantocellularis (NGC) and gigantocellularis pars alpha (NGC alpha) were examined and characterized in rats lightly anesthetized with pentobarbital.  Both inhibition and facilitation of the TF reflex were produced by electrical stimulation at identical sites in the NGC/NGC alpha; glutamate microinjection only inhibited the TF reflex.  The chronaxie of stimulation for inhibition of the TF reflex was 169 +/- 28 microseconds.  Inhibition of the TF reflex by stimulation was produced throughout the NGC and NGC alpha; intensities of stimulation for inhibition were least in the ventral NGC and in the NGC alpha.  At threshold intensities of stimulation, inhibition of the TF reflex did not outlast the period of stimulation.  Facilitation of the TF reflex was produced at many of the same sites at which stimulation inhibited the TF reflex, but always at lesser intensities of stimulation (mean, 10 microA vs.  43 microA for inhibition, n = 25).  Stimulation in the NGC/NGC alpha at threshold intensities for facilitation or inhibition of the TF reflex did not significantly affect blood pressure.  Strength-duration characterization of electrical stimulation and microinjection of glutamate into identical sites in the NGC and NGC alpha suggest that descending inhibition of the TF reflex results from activation of cell bodies in the NGC and NGC alpha.
Transcranial electrical stimulation with high frequency intermittent current (Limoge's) potentiates opiate-induced analgesia: blind studies.  Transcutaneous cranial electrical stimulation (TCES) with high frequency (166 kHz) intermittent current (100 Hz: Limoge current) has been used for several years in cardiac, thoracic, abdominal, urological and micro-surgery.  The main benefits are a reduced requirement for analgesic drugs, especially opiates, and a long-lasting postoperative analgesia.  We have confirmed these clinical observations in rats using the tail-flick latency (TFL) test to measure pain threshold.  TCES was not found to modify the pain threshold in drug-free rats, but it potentiated morphine-induced analgesia (systemic injection).  To obtain a maximal effect, the stimulation must be initiated 3 h before the drug injection and be maintained throughout the duration of its pharmacological action.  TCES potentitation was found to depend on the dose of the drug, the intensity of the current and the polarity of electrodes.  These findings were confirmed by blind tests of the efficiency of TCES on several opiate analgesic drugs currently used in human surgery (morphine, fentanyl, alfentanil and dextromoramide).  The analgesic effect of these 4 opiates (TFL as % of baseline without or with TCES) were respectively: 174%, 306%; 176%, 336%; 160%, 215%; and 267%, 392%.  The results were obtained not only after systemic opiate treatment, but also after intracerebroventricular injection of morphine (10 micrograms; analgesic effect 152%, 207% with TCES) suggesting that TCES potentiation of opiate-induced analgesia is centrally mediated.
The influence of warning signal timing and cognitive preparation on the aversiveness of electric shock.  Many medical and dental procedures are noxious.  Finding an optimal way of warning patients concerning the aversive procedures could help them to cope better.  A model for the effective use of a warning signal in coping with pain posited that a person needs enough time to be able to react and should possess the skills necessary to utilize the time effectively.  It was felt that a very short warning period, e.g., 5 sec, could not be long enough, while a 180 sec warning period would in and of itself become aversive.  Reactions to electric shock were obtained from 36 paid, volunteer subjects who were each tested on a within-subject, counterbalanced order at 4 different warning periods: 5, 30, 60, and 180 sec.  The subjects were divided into 3 groups: (1) the experimental group was provided with a pretested self-instructional booklet to learn a variety of pain control techniques; (2) the placebo group was provided with a self-instructional booklet on citizenship; (3) the control group waited quietly for 13 min.  No significant results were obtained for the different pain-coping conditions.  Significant differences, however, were obtained for the various warning periods.  Maximum skin resistance changes, higher ratings of pain and of anxiety were obtained for the 60 and 180 compared to the 5 and 30 sec warning periods.  Maximum heart rate was obtained for the 30 sec warning.  Results were discussed in terms of the psychological meaning of the various measures as well as their clinical implications.
Efficacy of methylphenidate among mentally retarded children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.  Twelve children with IQ scores of 50 to 74 (educable mental retardation) who met rigorous diagnostic criteria for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder participated in a double-blind crossover study of the efficacy of two doses of methylphenidate compared with placebo.  Dependent measures included behavioral ratings, classroom work output, laboratory measures of attention and learning, and direct observations of social behavior.  Improvement with medication on the Conners Hyperactivity Index was observed in 75% of subjects.  Significant increases in work output, on-task behavior, and attentional skills were associated with methylphenidate.  However, gains in measures of attention were not associated with improvement in learning, as measured by a paired associate learning task.  Additionally, no significant increases in appropriate social interactions during free play were associated with methylphenidate.  The results suggest that mentally retarded children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder respond to methylphenidate at similar rates and in similar domains to that of the nonretarded population.
Quantifying language development from birth to 3 years using the Early Language Milestone Scale.  A point-scoring technique for the Early Language Milestone Scale is described.  Normative data based on the original 1982 cross-sectional sample and validation data based on a separate longitudinal sample are presented.  Mean Early Language Milestone Scale point scores, standard deviations, and percentile equivalents for raw point scores are presented for all ages from birth to 36 months.  Correlations between point scores on the Early Language Milestone Scale and scores on other standardized developmental tests such as the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale, the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, and the Illinois Test of Psycholinguistic Abilities are presented.  The clinical and research advantages of this point-scoring technique are presented and compared with the original pass/fail scoring method.
Familial trigeminal neuralgia and Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy. Report of two families and review.  Typical trigeminal neuralgia has occasionally occurred in multiple members of the same family over several generations.  The clinical features of such cases, including the increased incidence in females, and the absence of other apparent hereditary, neurologic, metabolic, or structural abnormalities were identical to those of sporadic cases.  More rarely, familial trigeminal neuralgia has been described in the setting of hereditary peripheral neuropathy, especially Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.  We describe patients from two different families with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and medically intractable trigeminal neuralgia.  Both patients were successfully treated by percutaneous retrogasserian glycerol rhizolysis.  The occurrence of cranial nerve symptoms in patients with demyelinating peripheral neuropathies is discussed in light of the current hypotheses regarding the etiology of trigeminal neuralgia.
Anteromedial tibial tubercle transfer without bone graft.  We followed 30 patients for more than 2 years after anteromedial tibial tubercle transfer for persistent patellofemoral pain associated with patellar articular degeneration.  Twelve of these patients were followed more than 5 years.  We report 93% good and excellent results subjectively and 89% good and excellent results objectively.  The quality of improvement was sustained in all 12 of the patients who were evaluated again after more than 5 years from surgery.  When examined separately, 75% of those patients with advanced patellar arthrosis achieved a good result; none of these patients achieved an excellent result.  Postoperative continuous passive motion has markedly reduced the incidence of stiffness.  Serious complications such as compartment syndrome, infection, and skin slough were avoided completely in 51 consecutive cases.  Patellofemoral contact pressure studies in five cadaver knees have shown that anteromedial tibial tubercle transfer can provide substantial reduction of patellofemoral contact stress while helping to balance medial and lateral facet pressures.  This surgical procedure is mechanically and clinically successful for alleviating intractable pain related to patellar malalignment and articular degeneration.  This procedure enables the majority of appropriately selected patients with malalignment and patellar articular degeneration to resume increased levels of activity with substantially diminished pain.
Community hospital carotid endarterectomy in patients over age 75.  We compared the prevalence of stroke and death in 133 patients aged 75 and older in whom 170 carotid endarterectomies were performed with that in 501 patients less than age 75 in whom 640 carotid endarterectomies were performed.  There were three strokes (2%) in patients aged 75 and older and nine strokes (1%) in younger patients (p = 0.7).  There were 8 deaths (5%) in patients aged 75 and older and 14 deaths (2%) in younger patients (p = 0.1).  After controlling for the possible confounding effects of diabetes, prior stroke, history of angina, prior carotid artery disease, previous vascular surgery, history of myocardial infarction, preoperative hypertension requiring medication, and female gender, a logistic regression model showed that patients aged 75 and older were no more likely to have a stroke or death than patients under age 75.  We conclude that age alone is not a contraindication to the safe performance of carotid endarterectomy in the community hospital.
Alkalinisation of prilocaine for intravenous regional anaesthesia. Suitability for clinical use.  Eighty unpremedicated patients undergoing day-case hand surgery under intravenous regional anaesthesia were randomly allocated to receive, in a double-blind study, either 40 ml 0.75% prilocaine hydrochloride, with 5 ml 8.4% sodium bicarbonate or 5 ml 0.9% saline.  The alkalinised group had significantly less pain on injection (p = 0.0045), during surgery (p = 0.0074) and 5 minutes after the tourniquet was deflated (p = 0.0027).  The time elapsed between insertion of the block and commencement of surgery was not affected.
pH-adjustment and discomfort caused by the intradermal injection of lignocaine [published erratum appears in Anaesthesia 1991 Mar;46(3):242]  One hundred adult day-case patients who required intravenous access had cannulae inserted using local anaesthesia with 1% lignocaine, 1% lignocaine with adrenaline or the corresponding pH-adjusted solutions.  The local anaesthetic solutions were modified by the addition of 1 ml 8.4% sodium bicarbonate to 10 ml lignocaine.  Pain scores at different stages of cannulation were noted and showed a significant reduction after use of pH-adjusted solutions (p less than 0.02 for the plain lignocaine, and less than 0.001 for the lignocaine with adrenaline).  Modification of the pH of lignocaine solutions by the addition of sodium bicarbonate is a simple method significantly to reduce the discomfort caused by the infiltration of the local anaesthetic.
Synaptic transmission in human neocortex removed for treatment of intractable epilepsy in children.  Synaptic transmission to pyramidal cells was studied in slices of neocortex resected from infants and children (n = 10, age 8 months to 13 years) undergoing surgical treatment for intractable epilepsy.  Most specimens were from the least abnormal area of the resection.  Stable intracellular recordings could be obtained for up to 8 hours.  Most of the recorded neurons had electrophysiological characteristics similar to those of regular-firing pyramidal cells and were in layers III to V, which was confirmed by intracellular staining with Lucifer yellow.  Local extracellular stimulation evoked a sequence of excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials.  After application of the gamma-aminobutyric acid antagonist, bicuculline (10-30 microM), extracellular stimulation induced large excitatory postsynaptic potentials and epileptiform bursts.  Spontaneous bursts occasionally occurred in bicuculline.  This effect of bicuculline was observed in all the tissue samples, even those from infant patients (n = 4, age 8-16 months).  Kynurenic acid depressed or abolished both spontaneous and stimulation-induced bursts.  The competitive antagonist for N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, DL-2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoic acid decreased the duration of bicuculline-induced bursts.  These data provide evidence that, similar to rat and cat neocortex, excitatory and inhibitory amino acids are important transmitters to pyramidal cells in immature human neocortex.
NMDA antagonists potentiate antiparkinsonian actions of L-dopa in monoamine-depleted rats.  Systemically administered N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonists, MK-801 ((+)5-methyl-10,11-dihydro-5H-dibenzo(a,d)cyclohepten-5,10-imine maleate) and CPP (3-[(+-)-2-carboxypiperazin-4-yl]-propyl-1-phosphonate), potentiate the ability of L-dopa (L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine) to reverse akinesia and to alleviate muscular rigidity in monoamine-depleted rats.  On the basis of these findings, it is proposed that NMDA antagonists may be beneficial as adjunctive treatment in the therapy of Parkinson's disease.  CPP locally injected into the subthalamic nucleus, entopeduncular nucleus--the rat homologue of the internal pallidal segment--or substantia nigra pars reticulata of monoamine-depleted rats stimulates locomotor activity and alleviates rigidity, whereas local microinjection of CPP into the neostriatum is ineffective.  These results make it unlikely that the neostriatum is the site of the antiparkinsonian action of NMDA antagonists in monoamine-depleted rats, whereas the subthalamic nucleus, internal pallidal segment, and substantia nigra pars reticulata appear to be important for the effects of NMDA antagonists.
Failure of nine-month phenobarbital administration to reverse amygdaloid-kindled seizure susceptibility in cats.  Upon completion of left amygdaloid kindling, 4 cats underwent long-term phenobarbital administration during the subsequent 5- to 9-month rest period.  Plasma phenobarbital levels were maintained above 15 to 20 micrograms/ml and were restimulated following plasma phenobarbital washout.  Three cats served as nonmedicated controls.  All 7 cats were subjected to repeated 6-hour sleep monitoring for observation of interictal discharges, which were observed most often in the immediate postictal period.  Their frequency decreased gradually throughout the experiment in both the medicated and control animals, but they never completely disappeared except from the contralateral amygdala in 1 medicated animal.  Upon primary site restimulation, all of the medicated animals responded with a generalized convulsion once the afterdischarge was induced.  When these animals underwent secondary-site amygdaloid kindling, 3 showed a positive transfer effect.  The findings suggest that although phenobarbital is a potent anticonvulsant, it has little effect on the acquired seizure susceptibility of previously amygdaloid kindled cats.
Fetal homotransplants (ventral mesencephalon and adrenal tissue) to the striatum of parkinsonian subjects.  Fetal ventral mesencephalon and fetal adrenal tissue grafted to the caudate nucleus of four and three parkinsonian patients, respectively, have been shown to be an alternative treatment for the amelioration of the signs of the disease.  The ventral mesencephalon patients had a significant amelioration of rigidity, bradykinesia, postural imbalance, gait disturbance, and facial expression.  Three of these four patients have returned to work.  The fatal adrenal group only showed amelioration of rigidity and bradykinesia.  Though these patients are now able to perform their basic daily living activities, and one of them has renewed her household tasks, the other two have not yet been able to return to work.  The differences observed between the ventral mesencephalon- and the fetal adrenal-transplanted patients may be related to the heterogeneity of their disease and/or the type of graft implanted.  However encouraging our results may be, this experimental procedure obviously requires further studies, and should not be practiced outside of highly qualified clinical research centers.
White matter hyperintensities in dementia of Alzheimer's type and in healthy subjects without cerebrovascular risk factors. A magnetic resonance imaging study.  T2-weighted (0.5 T) magnetic resonance images were used to study the prevalence of subcortical white matter hyperintensities (WMHIs) in 22 patients with dementia of Alzheimer's type (DAT), 20 age-matched older healthy control subjects, and 10 younger healthy control subjects.  Exclusionary criteria for all groups included cerebrovascular risk factors.  All subjects had Hachinski Ischemic Index scores of less than 2 and computed tomographic scans showing no infarct.  The WMHIs were classified as periventricular WMHIs or deep WMHIs and graded 0 through 3 (0 indicated absent, and 3, severe).  For the group with DAT and older control subjects, periventricular WMHIs and deep WMHIs were graded 2 or 3 in fewer than 17% and 27% of subjects, respectively, whereas in the younger control subjects, all ratings were grade 1 or less.  Serum cholesterol and systolic blood pressure values, although within the normal range, were elevated significantly in older control subjects when compared with those in younger control subjects.  No significant differences in WMHI ratings, blood pressure, cholesterol, or triglyceride levels were found between patients with DAT and age-matched control subjects.  Systolic blood pressure levels correlated with the severity of periventricular WMHIs only in older control subjects.  Age correlated with periventricular WMHIs and deep WMHIs within both the older control subjects and the patients with DAT.  There was no significant correlation between WMHIs and the severity of dementia in the group with DAT.  These results suggest that, in subjects screened for cerebrovascular risk factors, WMHIs are rare and occur with identical frequency in patients with DAT as in age-matched healthy control subjects.
Primary progressive aphasia. Longitudinal course, neuropsychological profile, and language features.  Four patients with the clinical syndrome of primary progressive aphasia and a nonfluent aphasia profile were followed up over a period of 3 to 5 years.  Extensive neuropsychological data for three patients revealed a progressive, quantitative decline of language with relative stability of memory, visuospatial skills, and reasoning.  Comportment and most activities of daily living were preserved even when speech was unintelligible.  Although several aphasia types may be associated with primary progressive aphasia, a nonfluent aphasia profile and phonemic paraphasic errors are most useful in differentiating it from the much more common clinical syndrome, "probable Alzheimer's disease." The clinicopathological correlates of probable Alzheimer's disease differ from those associated with primary progressive aphasia.  Therefore, the clinical distinction between the two syndromes may be important for predicting the underlying pathophysiologic changes during the life of the patient.
Plasticity in the aging brain. Reversibility of anatomic, metabolic, and cognitive deficits in normal-pressure hydrocephalus following shunt surgery.  The course of idiopathic normal-pressure hydrocephalus was studied in a 78-year-old woman with a 4-year history of progressive dementia who underwent neuropsychologic testing, quantitative x-ray computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and positron emission tomography with fludeoxyglucose F 18 to measure rates of regional cerebral glucose utilization.  Preshunt cognitive testing demonstrated progressive deterioration during 2 years, and positron emission tomography showed significant reductions in regional cerebral glucose utilization of 34% to 49% as compared with age- and sex-matched control subjects in frontal, temporal, parietal, and whole brain regions.  Periodic testing, carried out during a 2-year period after shunt surgery, showed steady improvement in clinical status.  Parallel to the clinical changes, there was a significant reversal in neuropsychologic test scores with increased brain volume and increased regional cerebral glucose utilization in several brain regions.  These results documented the considerable potential for recovery of compromised brain function in older subjects even after 4 years of progressive brain disease.
Effects of physostigmine on spatial attention in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy.  We tested patients with progressive supranuclear palsy and control subjects on a task of visuopatial attention.  Targets preceded by cues on the same side were termed validly cued; and those on the opposite side, invalidly cued.  For all subjects, validly cued targets were responded to faster than those that were invalidly cued.  The difference between reaction times for invalidly and validly cued targets, which is hypothesized to measure attentional movement, was significantly increased for the patients.  The performance of the controls on certain neuropsychological tests was correlated with their attentional ability.  These correlations were altered by progressive supranuclear palsy.  Physostigmine treatment of the patients induced a speeding of responses to invalidly cued targets as a function of the duration of the disease.  These studies show defects in cognition and attention in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy and demonstrate that physostigmine reduces some of the abnormal visual attentional performance.
Safety, stability, and effectiveness of immunoadsorption under membrane plasmapheresis treatment for myasthenia gravis.  Nine patients (five women and four men, average age 50.4 years) with refractory myasthenia gravis (MG) underwent thymectomy and were then treated with immunoadsorption under membrane plasmaphersis (IAP).  Thymic histology showed hyperplasia in nine patients.  An immunoadsorption column (ASAHI, Med, Co) was made with tryptophan.  A Plasouto 1,000 (ASAHI, Med, Co) was used as the machine.  The plasma separator was a first filter (ASAHI, Med, Co), and immunoadsorption columns were used for plasma perfusion.  IAP treatment was performed three times weekly for a total of six times, after which IAP was done every 3 weeks.  The removal rate of anti-Ach-R titer was 54 +/- 12%; IgG, IgA, and IgM levels improved in nine of nine patients after IAP treatment, and improvement of gait disturbances were seen in two of two.  Muscle strength improved in all nine patients, whereas speech disturbances improved in two of three.  Eye ptosis improved in nine of nine patients.  Subjective improvement was reported by nine of nine patients, and none had severe side effects with IAP.  In conclusion, IAP is a safe, stable, effective, and clinically useful treatment.  for MG.
Aids for visual impairment.  This article provides only a flavour of the type and range of aids available to the visually impaired person.  Many other aids for leisure, learning, and daily living are illustrated in the RNIB equipment and games catalogue.
From disease to delirium: managing the declining elderly patient.  Many geriatric patients have concurrent physical and psychiatric illnesses, but at times it may be difficult to determine which is primary.  Delirium, a transient syndrome that presents with psychiatric symptoms, is usually the manifestation of an organic disorder and, if undetected and untreated, can be fatal.  Clinicians, therefore, must learn to recognize the syndrome, search diligently for the underlying etiology, and treat accordingly.
Phenotypic and functional characterization of T cells from patients with myasthenia gravis.  A study of cell surface phenotypes of PBL of myasthenia gravis (MG) patients showed that their T cells had a significantly higher percentage of 4B4+ T cells (the helper/inducer subset) than age- and sex-matched controls.  The PBL of MG patients proliferated significantly higher than those of normal subjects (NS) in response to the purified alpha chain of the acetylcholine receptor (AChR).  Anti-AChR antibody was present in sera of 88% of MG and none of the NS.  The PBL B cells from MG only, when cultured with autologous T cells and stimulated with either pokeweed mitogen (69%), or AChR-alpha chain (38%), secreted antibody to AChR-alpha chain, whereas T and B cells alone secreted no antibody.  T cells from PBL of MG patients were more readily cloned than T cells of NS, by limiting dilution, in the presence of recombinant IL-2 and in the absence of AChR-alpha chain.  About 50% of T cell clones from MG patients, compared to none from NS, proliferated to AChR-alpha chain.  This response was HLA-DR restricted.  MG T cell clones did not display significant cytotoxic activity, as compared to control T cell clones.  Our results indicate that in MG, 4B4+ regulatory T cells play their role in the pathogenesis of MG, not by cytotoxicity, but more likely by their ability to stimulate specific antibody production by B cells.
Ultrasonic integrated backscatter two-dimensional imaging: evaluation of M-mode guided acquisition and immediate analysis in 55 consecutive patients.  We have shown previously that cardiac cycle-dependent integrated backscatter characterizes the physical state of myocardium in patients with ischemic heart disease and cardiomyopathy.  In the present study the clinical applicability of M-mode guided two-dimensional integrated backscatter imaging was defined in evaluation of 55 nonselected patients.  The mean amplitude of cyclic variation of integrated backscatter in normal segments (long-axis view) was as follows: basal septum, 4.2 +/- 1.3 dB (mean +/- SD; n = 27), mid-septum, 4.5 +/- 1.0 dB (n = 26), basal posterior, 4.8 +/- 1.0 dB (n = 30), and mid-posterior, 4.8 +/- 1.2 decibels (n = 27).  The respective mean delay values (R wave to nadir) were as follows: 0.89 +/- 0.09, 0.84 +/- 0.09, 0.86 +/- 0.09, and 0.85 +/- 0.12.  At least one cardiac cycle could be analyzed fully in 62% of patients.  Limitations included technically difficult two-dimensional echocardiography, inadequate M-line orientation, technically remediable errors, or poor quality integrated backscatter images.  In abnormal segments (n = 13) cyclic variation was reduced and delay was prolonged (1.2 +/- 1.1 dB and 1.21 +/- 1.1, respectively).  Intraobserver and interobserver variability for amplitude measurements were modest, with respective correlation coefficients of r = 0.93; r = 0.72.  The findings demonstrate that M-mode--assisted integrated backscatter is a practical approach for characterization of regional myocardial properties promptly and at the bedside in a large portion of patients with cardiac disease.
Left and right ventricular flows by Doppler echocardiography: serial measurements in patients with aortic regurgitation during exercise, cold pressor stimulation, and vasodilation.  To test the practicality of Doppler echocardiography to measure serial change, biventricular outputs were measured in 15 patients with aortic regurgitation during control periods and during interventions of bicycle exercise, cold pressor stimulation, and vasodilation.  Biventricular stroke volumes were measured in 10 normal subjects for validation of methods and differed by 2.8%.  Reading errors were 3.7%.  Signal quality improved between the first and last observation (p less than 0.05).  Velocity signals were corrected for intercept angles, which averaged 12 and 19 degrees for right heart flows and 31 and 32 degrees for the left side of the heart in all subjects.  Negative correlations occurred between intercept angles and the chronologic order in which the patients were studied for left (p = 0.02) and right (p = 0.05) flows.  Mean flow areas varied 9% in the left ventricle and 20% in the right ventricle.  Total variability for measuring flow determined from control values was 11% to 13%.  When twice the variability was used as the detectable level of change, only exercise provoked real increases in biventricular flows in the majority of patients.  We conclude that serial measurements of flow by Doppler echocardiographic methods had to exceed 20% to 25% to achieve significant change.  Measuring intercept angle, resolving flow area, and learning are variables that need greater emphasis.
Flow patterns in dilated cardiomyopathy: a pulsed-wave and color flow Doppler study.  In 48 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy, pulsed-wave and color Doppler examination were performed.  In addition, 14 normal patients served as control subjects.  Peak inflow velocity at the level of the mitral valve, middle left ventricle, and apex and outflow velocity at the level of the apex, middle left ventricle, and subaortic area were measured.  In normal patients there was brisk propagation of inflow velocity to the apex.  Patients with dilated cardiomyopathy demonstrated delayed propagation and prolongation of the duration of inflow compared with control subjects (p less than 0.04).  Continuous apical flow was visualized in 25% of dilated cardiomyopathies and in no normal patients.  Apical velocities were significantly increased in cardiomyopathies with significant mitral regurgitation.  Outflow velocities were decreased in dilated cardiomyopathy.  In patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and apical dyskinesis, flow directed toward the base was measured in the middle left ventricle during isovolumic relaxation secondary to dyskinetic rebound.  Patterns of abnormal flow in dilated cardiomyopathies are readily apparent by color M-mode and two-dimensional color Doppler.
Prevalence of aortic regurgitation by color flow Doppler in relation to aortic root size.  To determine whether there is a correlation between aortic root size and the prevalence of aortic regurgitation, we performed color flow Doppler echocardiographic studies on 1015 consecutive patients during a 3-month period.  Patients were grouped according to their M-mode aortic root diameter as measured in the left parasternal position.  The measured groups ranged from 2.0 to 4.5 cm, grouped at 0.1 cm intervals.  As the aortic root size enlarged, the prevalence of aortic regurgitation increased linearly (p less than 0.001; correlation coefficient, r = 0.75).  At an aortic root size in the "small normal" range of 2.0 to 2.4 cm, the prevalence of aortic regurgitation was 0% to 15%.  In the "intermediate" and "top normal" ranges of 2.9 to 3.7 cm, the prevalence of aortic regurgitation increased linearly from 15% to 47%.  With aortic root dilation, the prevalence of aortic root regurgitation was generally more than 50%.  The severity of aortic regurgitation was semiquantified.  Aortic root size was not a good indicator for the severity of aortic regurgitation.  Patients with moderate and severe aortic regurgitation had variable aortic root sizes.  Throughout the range of aortic root sizes, mild aortic regurgitation predominated.  We conclude that aortic regurgitation is a common finding in patients with aortic roots that are dilated or are in the "top normal" size range, that the prevalence of aortic regurgitation increases linearly with aortic root size, and that aortic root size does not correlate with the severity of aortic regurgitation.
Two-dimensional echocardiographic features of double outlet left ventricle.  In a cyanotic newborn infant, the diagnosis of double outlet left ventricle was made from the two-dimensional echocardiographic examination.  The diagnosis was later confirmed at cardiac catheterization and surgery.  The parasternal and subcostal views were especially useful for identification of the origin of both great arteries from the morphologic left ventricle.  A review of the medical literature since 1967 revealed 77 cases of double outlet left ventricle, most of which were diagnosed only at surgery or postmortem examination.  The anatomic features demonstrated with two-dimensional echocardiography in this case are representative of the findings cited most often in the cases reported in the medical literature.
Evolution of the continuity equation in the Doppler echocardiographic assessment of the severity of valvular aortic stenosis.  The use of Doppler techniques has greatly enhanced the noninvasive ultrasound technique for evaluation of valvular aortic stenosis.  M-mode and two-dimensional echocardiography could not reliably distinguish patients with severe aortic stenosis from those with milder obstructions.  The hemodynamic information offered by Doppler complemented echocardiographic imaging and provided an alternative modality for evaluation of patients with aortic stenosis.  By application of the modified Bernoulli equation, the pressure gradient across the stenotic aortic valve could be estimated by Doppler echocardiography.  Though helpful and widely used, the information provided by the pressure gradient across the valve about the severity of the obstruction was not complete.  The assessment of valvular aortic stenosis therefore includes an estimation of the valve area by application of the continuity equation.  This review examines the maturation of the continuity equation by Doppler techniques and discusses the implications of the procedure.
The determination of aortic valve area by the Gorlin formula: what the cardiac sonographer should know.  The application of the Gorlin formula in the cardiac catheterization laboratory is the standard of reference for the determination of aortic valve area.  The continuity equation now enables the cardiac sonographer to determine aortic valve area noninvasively in the echocardiography laboratory.  The comparison of the results obtained by the two methods is inevitable.  The cardiac sonographer should have a basic understanding of the theory and pitfalls of the Gorlin formula so that when conflicting results are obtained, the possible reasons why will be clear.
The evaluation of the abdominal aorta: a "how-to" for cardiac sonographers.  A thorough evaluation of the abdominal aorta can be readily achieved by use of the standard views of the echocardiographic examination.  The ultrasound evaluation of the abdominal aorta represents a logical extension of the standard echocardiographic examination of the adult patient.  This article provides the information needed to carry out a complete ultrasound examination of the abdominal aorta including the anatomy, the vascular disease, and the steps involved in accomplishing the ultrasound examination of the abdominal aorta.
Multivariate analysis in the prediction of death in hospital after acute myocardial infarction.  Prognostic factors in patients with acute myocardial infarction based on clinical and investigative data on admission were evaluated prospectively in 111 consecutive patients.  Seventeen patients (15.3%) died during hospital stay.  Age, a previous infarct, high Killip class, cardiomegaly, high serum concentrations of cardiac enzymes, a low ejection fraction, and a high wall motion score index correlated significantly with in-hospital mortality; whereas sex, risk factors, and pericardial effusion did not.  Multivariate analysis showed that age and the wall motion score index were the best predictors of death in hospital.  Wall motion detected by cross sectional echocardiography may reflect the extent of myocardial involvement.  Age and wall motion score index predicted in-hospital mortality with a sensitivity of 76.5%, a specificity of 91.5%, and a predictive accuracy of 89.2%.  Age and the wall motion score index can be determined on admission and are useful for identifying patients at high risk of cardiac death who might benefit from early intervention.
Ischaemic left ventricular failure: evidence of sustained benefit after 18 months' treatment with xamoterol.  The long term effects of treatment with xamoterol in 14 patients aged 44-73 with mild to moderate heart failure as a result of ischaemic heart disease are reported.  After 18 months' treatment with xamoterol, patients were assessed in a randomised double blind crossover comparison of xamoterol (200 mg twice a day) and placebo, each given for one month.  Compared with placebo, xamoterol significantly increased exercise duration and work done on a bicycle ergometer and reduced the maximum exercise heart rate.  Assessment of symptoms and activities at 12 months by visual analogue and Likert scales showed a trend towards the relief of symptoms of breathlessness and tiredness and an improvement in activity.  There was an improvement in the clinical signs of heart failure and no haemodynamic deterioration over a 12 month period as assessed by ejection fraction.  The improvement in exercise tolerance, symptoms, and activities was sustained for 18 months without side effects or development of tolerance.
Geographical clustering of risk factors and lifestyle for coronary heart disease in the Scottish Heart Health Study.  A large cross sectional study, the Scottish Heart Health Study, of 10,359 men and women from 22 districts of Scotland was undertaken to try to explain the geographical variation of coronary heart disease mortality.  Analysis by district showed that of the classic risk factors only cigarette smoking was strongly associated with heart disease mortality among both men and women.  Mean diastolic blood pressure was weakly associated with rates among men and high density lipoprotein cholesterol showed a strong negative association among women.  Total cholesterol showed a weak negative association with heart disease mortality, but, because the serum concentrations of cholesterol were uniformly high in all districts, a strong association with mortality would not be expected.  In both men and women many dietary factors showed moderate or strong associations with mortality from coronary heart disease in a district--of these a low consumption of vitamin C was most notable.  Other factors associated with heart disease included alcohol consumption and serum triglycerides among men, and obesity, physical activity, and serum triglycerides among women.  Many factors associated with heart disease showed strong intercorrelations.  Clustering of risk factors (including smoking, alcohol, and diet among men, and smoking, diet, and obesity among women) was associated with much of the regional variation in heart disease mortality in Scotland.
Cardiac catheterisation with 5 French catheters.  From the beginning of November 1987 to the end of January 1989, 526 coronary arteriograms and left ventricular angiograms were performed with 5 French coronary catheters.  In 448 (85%) patients diagnostic pictures were obtained with three standard types of 5 French catheters (No 4 Judkins): that is, left coronary, right coronary, and pigtail catheters.  In 60 patients (11.4%) various other 5 French catheters were required to complete the study.  In nine patients (1.7%), a 7 or 8 French catheter was used.  Major complications causing cardiac arrest or requiring urgent operation developed in five patients.  Sixty two patients (11.77%) had minor complications that required sublingual nitrates or a single bolus of atropine, or developed a haematoma that did not need intervention or had a mild reaction to the contrast material.  Complications of moderate severity developed in 17 patients (3.2%): severe chest pain, arrhythmia requiring a temporary pacemaker, contrast reaction associated with hypotension, haematoma requiring blood transfusion, or a transient ischaemic episode.  There were no deaths.  5 French catheters were used for routine coronary angiography and left ventriculography in 98.3% of patients.  There were no major complications related to femoral artery puncture.  The routine use of 5 French coronary catheters should increase the feasibility of safe coronary angiography in outpatients and should reduce the cost of this investigation.
Discrepancies in the measurement of isovolumic relaxation time: a study comparing M mode and Doppler echocardiography.  Mitral valve cusp separation on M mode echogram, the mitral valve opening artefact, and the onset of forward transmitral flow recorded by Doppler echocardiography have all been taken to mark the end of isovolumic relaxation, while its onset has been taken either as the aortic closure sound (A2) recorded phonocardiographically or the aortic closure artefact determined by Doppler technique.  Possible differences in the measurement of the isovolumic relaxation time were studied when these landmarks were used in 44 healthy people, 14 patients with mitral stenosis, 21 patients with left ventricular hypertrophy, and 24 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy by recording M mode echograms of the mitral valve, and pulsed and continuous wave Doppler spectra of transmitral flow, with simultaneous electrocardiograms and phonocardiograms.  A2 was effectively synchronous with the aortic artefact.  However, when the onset of Doppler flow was regarded as the end of isovolumic relaxation, the interval was significantly longer than when mitral cusp separation on M mode echograms was used: by 25 (10) ms in healthy individuals, by 25 (15) ms in patients with left ventricular hypertrophy, and by 50 (35) ms in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy.  In patients with mitral stenosis the interval was only 5 (5) ms longer.  The mitral valve opening artefact consistently followed the onset of flow and corresponded much more closely to the E point on the M mode echogram.  This shows that it occurred during the rapid filling period and well beyond isovolumic relaxation by any definition.  Thus isovolumic relaxation time measured from A2 to the onset of transmitral flow or the mitral valve opening artefact differs from that derived from A2 to mitral valve cusp separation.  These intervals cannot be used interchangeably to measure "isovolumic relaxation time".
Retrograde recanalization of an occluded posterior tibial artery by using a posterior tibial cutdown: two case reports.  Recanalization of two occluded posterior tibial arteries was successfully achieved by utilizing a retrograde approach via a posterior tibial artery cutdown at the level of the ankle.  Both cases were previously unsuccessfully attempted by using an antegrade approach.  Thus, the choice of access vessel (arterial entry site) becomes a crucial determinant of angioplasty success.
Simplified method for estimating true aortic valve mean gradient from simultaneous left ventricular and peripheral arterial pressure recordings.  Estimation of the aortic valve gradient by simultaneous recording of left ventricular and peripheral arterial pressures is subject to error due to delay and modulation of the arterial pressure contour as it propagates from the ascending aorta.  This error can be corrected by averaging the mean gradients derived from unaltered and temporally aligned simultaneous left ventricular-peripheral arterial pressure tracings.  In 26 patients with aortic stenosis and simultaneous recordings of ascending aortic and femoral arterial pressure we compared this method with a simplified approach in which the peripheral arterial pressure is partially aligned by advancing it against the left ventricular pressure by 50% of the time delay of the simultaneously recorded upstrokes.  Gradients measured this way predicted the true aortic valve gradients (left ventricular-ascending aortic) with a mean difference of +1.1 mm Hg (range = +10 to -5 mm Hg).  We recommend use of this simplified method of correction because it predicts true aortic valve gradient equally well as the averaging technique (r = 0.977 vs.  0.979) and requires half the time and effort.
Experience with the use of coronary autoperfusion catheter during complicated angioplasty.  Between February and July of 1989, 22 patients underwent the use of the Stack autoperfusion catheter following acute occlusion or obstructive dissection during coronary angioplasty; in 20 cases conventional balloon was used in an attempt to correct the angiographic appearance followed by the use of Stack catheter when results were sub-optimal.  Only 1 patient (4.5%) required surgical revascularization.  Although our study is not prospective or randomized, our observations suggest a significant impact in decreasing the need for emergency surgical revascularization after complicated coronary angioplasty with the use of this approach.
Use of a guiding catheter for contralateral femoral artery angioplasty.  We describe a unique method employing a transseptal sheath as a "guiding catheter" that allows contralateral retrograde femoral artery access to perform balloon angioplasty of proximal superficial femoral artery lesions.  This technique simplifies arterial access, provides support for crossing lesions, and allows angiographic visualization of target lesions during the procedure.
Percutaneous valvuloplasty in a patient with mitral stenosis following surgical annuloplasty.  A case is described in which a patient with a Carpentier-Edwards annuloplasty ring developed mitral stenosis and was treated with percutaneous mitral valvuloplasty.  Possible mechanisms for the development of mitral stenosis are briefly discussed.
Left main percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty with the autoperfusion catheter in an animal model.  Left main coronary angioplasty is associated with high risk because of interruption of blood flow to much of the left ventricle during balloon inflation.  An "autoperfusion" balloon angioplasty catheter that allows blood to flow passively distal to an inflated balloon was tested in dogs and compared with inflations with standard balloon catheters.  During 3 min occlusions of the left main coronary artery with the autoperfusion catheter, regional myocardial blood flow was preserved at 0.60 +/- 0.14 ml/min/g, compared with 0.07 +/- 0.03 ml/min/g during inflation with standard balloon catheters (P less than 0.01).  Similarly, at the end of 3 min of inflation, left ventricular systolic pressure and dP/dt were maintained with autoperfusion catheter inflation, but they were severely depressed after standard angioplasty balloon inflation.  All seven dogs survived autoperfusion balloon inflation, whereas five of seven developed sustained ventricular tachycardia and/or ventricular fibrillation during or after standard balloon inflation.  Thus, distal blood flow, hemodynamics, and survival were preserved during autoperfusion balloon inflation in the left main coronary artery.
A rapid, effective technique for retrograde crossing of valvular aortic stenosis using standard coronary catheters   Retrograde crossing of valvular aortic stenosis can be challenging even to experienced angiographers.  In 446 of 447 consecutive patients with aortic stenosis catheterized during the past 3 years, a technique using a standard Judkins right coronary catheter and a floppy straight tipped guide wire was successful in rapidly and efficiently crossing these pathologically distorted valves in retrograde fashion.  Once the valve was crossed, the coronary catheter was replaced with a pigtail catheter for pressure and ventriculography.  The majority of these valves required less than 2 min to cross using this technique.  This method is valuable in limiting the time required for catheterization, thus helping to reduce procedure related morbidity in these oftimes critically ill patients.
Nitrous oxide does not exacerbate pulmonary hypertension or ventricular dysfunction in patients with mitral valvular disease   Using the rapid-response thermistor pulmonary artery catheter and transoesophageal echocardiography, this study examined the effects of 100 per cent oxygen, 70 per cent nitrous oxide/30 per cent oxygen, and 70 per cent nitrogen/30 per cent oxygen on the pulmonary circulation and ventricular function in ten patients with pulmonary hypertension.  In comparison with baseline measurements, nitrous oxide administration resulted in small but statistically significant (P less than 0.05) changes in mean arterial pressure (76 +/- 14 to 67 +/- 12), mean pulmonary arterial pressure (37 +/- 14 to 33 +/- 13 mmHg), and cardiac output (3.7 +/- 1.4 to 3.2 +/- 1.1 L.min-1).  Seventy per cent nitrogen resulted in no significant changes from baseline.  The repeat 100 per cent oxygen measurements were nearly identical to the nitrous oxide measurements.  It is concluded that nitrous oxide does not exacerbate pulmonary hypertension or ventricular dysfunction during high-dose fentanyl anaesthesia in patients with mitral valvular disease.
Regulation of fibrillar collagen types I and III and basement membrane type IV collagen gene expression in pressure overloaded rat myocardium.  Left ventricular hypertrophy is based on cardiac myocyte growth.  The hypertrophic process can be considered heterogeneous based on whether it also includes a remodeling and accumulation of fibrillar types I and III collagens that are responsible for impaired myocardial stiffness.  In the heart, the messenger RNA (mRNA) for fibrillar collagen types I and III has been detected only in cardiac fibroblasts, whereas mRNA for basement membrane collagen type IV is present in both fibroblasts and myocytes.  We studied the early and long-term expression of these collagenous proteins in rat myocardium after abdominal aortic banding with renal ischemia.  Complementary DNA probes for rat pro-alpha 2 (I), mouse type III and mouse type IV collagens, and chicken beta-actin were used.  Northern and dot blot analysis on total RNA extracted from left ventricular tissue indicated a sixfold increase in steady-state levels of mRNA for collagen type I on day 3 of abdominal aortic banding, which had declined to control levels by day 7 where it remained rather constant at 4 and 8 weeks.  Type III collagen showed a similar pattern of gene expression after banding.  mRNA levels for type IV collagen, on the other hand, were elevated on day 1 after banding, returning to control at day 7 and remaining constant.  Actin mRNA levels also increased on day 1 of banding, followed by a rapid return to control levels.  Monospecific antibody to types I and III collagens and immunofluorescent light microscopy on frozen sections of the myocardium revealed that at 1 week after banding, the distribution and density of these collagens were similar to those of control animals.
Hemodynamic and metabolic effects of dobutamine in 18 patients after open heart surgery.  Low cardiac output syndrome frequently follows cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) surgery.  In the present study, we used dobutamine to increase cardiac index (CI) and oxygen delivery (DO2) in 18 patients after open heart surgery.  Using increasing doses of dobutamine up to 10 micrograms/kg.min-1, we observed statistically significant (p less than .01) increases in mean CI (2.50 +/- 0.10 to 3.56 +/- 0.18 L/min.m2) and in mean heart rate (HR) (83 +/- 3 to 105 +/- 3 beat/min).  Mean systemic vascular resistance index decreased significantly (p less than .01) in all patients (2271 +/- 101 to 1648 +/- 83 dyne.sec/cm5.m2).  Pulmonary vascular resistance index did not change in the ten coronary artery bypass graft patients, but decreased significantly (p less than .01) in the eight valve replacement patients (561 +/- 98 to 421 +/- 79 dyne.sec/cm5.m2).  Mean DO2 increased in all patients, although there was no concomitant increase in oxygen consumption (VO2) in four patients.  We observed a significant (p less than .01) increase in mean VO2 in the remaining 14 patients (110 +/- 6 to 148 +/- 12 ml/min.m2), in spite of significant decreases in PaO2 and increases in right-to-left intrapulmonary shunting.  Although increases in HR and ventricular arrhythmias may limit its use, dobutamine increases CI and DO2 in patients after CPB.  In the present study, dobutamine's varying metabolic effect exemplifies the need for close monitoring of hemodynamic and metabolic variables when using vasoactive drugs in the postoperative period.
Plasma epinephrine levels in resuscitation with cardiopulmonary bypass.  Since the highest plasma epinephrine levels have been recorded during resuscitation, we evaluated the isolated effect of cardiac arrest upon adrenomedullary secretion.  We determined plasma epinephrine in dogs resuscitated with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) after cardiac arrest periods of 12 (CPB-12; n = 4) or 16 min (CPB-16; n = 5).  Through 2 h of CPB and the following 6 h of critical care, there was no difference between CPB-12 and CPB-16 regarding most cardiopulmonary functional variables.  Plasma epinephrine was markedly elevated immediately after initiation of CPB (p less than .01 at 1 min CPB vs.  basal) and returned rapidly to basal concentrations.  Comparison of plasma epinephrine levels between CPB and standard CPR groups showed that responses to cardiac arrest were similar (p greater than .05 at 1 min CPB vs.  11.5 min CPR).  We conclude that cardiac arrest is the main or sole determinant of the plasma epinephrine elevation of resuscitation.
Effect of hemodilution on capillary and arteriolovenous shunt flow in organs after cardiac arrest in dogs.  The purpose of this study was to observe the changes in capillary and arteriolovenous shunting blood flow after cardiac arrest and subsequent resuscitation by venous return occlusion produced by inflation of an intra-atrial balloon and cross-clamping of the ascending aorta, and to determine how hemodilution might modify such changes.  Organ capillary blood flow and the fractional distribution of cardiac output were measured by the microsphere (9-microns diameter) trapping method in dogs.  Simultaneously, the arteriolovenous shunt rate was measured by continuous collection of venous blood drained at 4.8 ml.min-1 for 2 min from the brain, kidney, liver, splanchnic organs, skeletal muscle of the pelvic limb, and all of the systemic circulatory organs.  The capillary blood flow of the brain, thyroid gland, pancreas, and stomach decreased after circulatory arrest in five nonhemodiluted dogs (group C); arteriolovenous shunt rate was unchanged after circulatory arrest in this group.  However, with hemodilution, which was induced either before (pre group, n = 5) or after (post group, n = 5) circulatory arrest, no change occurred in the shunt rate in any of the organs, with the exception of an increase in the systemic arteriolovenous shunt rate in the pre group.  Capillary blood flow was maintained at almost the same level as before circulatory arrest in the pre group, but increased significantly in several organs of the post group.  The data indicated that hemodilution might be effective for prevention of organ ischemia after cardiac arrest.
Noninvasive determination of pulmonary artery wedge pressure: comparative analysis of pulsed Doppler echocardiography and right heart catheterization.  To compare left ventricular filling variables as derived by transmitral pulsed Doppler echocardiography (tpDE) and hemodynamic variables as assessed at right heart catheterization (RHC), 104 ICU patients (64 male, 40 female) aged 26 to 73 yr (mean 54.6 +/- 10.3) without valvular heart disease were examined.  Simultaneously with RHC, transmitral flow velocity profiles were obtained by tpDE, and the ratio of the velocity-time integrals of late diastolic active (A wave) and early diastolic passive inflow into the left ventricle (E wave) was calculated (A/E ratio).  Invasively determined pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (WP) ranged from 3 to 36 mm Hg (median 13.35, 5%/95% 6/31 mm Hg).  Linear regression analysis showed a highly significant correlation between the A/E ratio and WP (r = .98, p less than .001, standard error of the estimate [SEE] = 0.10).  The A/E ratio also correlated with other hemodynamic variables such as cardiac output (r = -.68, p less than .001, SEE = 0.33), cardiac index (r = -.74, p less than .001, SEE = 0.31), and stroke volume index (r = -.68, p less than .001, SEE = 0.34).  The interobserver agreement (derived by intraclass correlation analysis between two examiners) on the A/E ratio was high (r = .95, p less than .001, n = 26).  We conclude that WP can be accurately determined noninvasively by tpDE.  For the assessment of systolic ventricular function, tpDE is of limited diagnostic value.
Traumatic rupture of aorta. Diagnosis by Doppler echocardiography.  Traumatic rupture of aorta is a serious complication in accidents, mainly road accidents, with a high mortality unless an immediate diagnosis and surgical correction is made.  A case of traumatic rupture of the aorta shown in the acute phase by Doppler-echocardiography is reported.  This technique can be of great value in the study of patients with thoracic trauma who do not show clear signs of aortic rupture which require urgent aortography.
Orthostatic hypotension following right ventricular myocardial infarction corrected with mineralocorticoid therapy.  Severe hypotension while standing became a problem in a patient after discharge from the hospital following right ventricular myocardial infarction.  Hemodynamic studies showed that right ventricular systolic function did not maintain adequate left ventricular preload and that the patient did not compensate for cardiac dysfunction by increasing blood volume.  Volume expansion by mineralocorticoid therapy corrected the orthostatic hypotension and ameliorated symptoms.  Hypotension eventually resolved and therapy was stopped four months after the myocardial infarction.
Florid pulmonary veno-occlusive disease.  A young woman presented with rapidly progressive dyspnea and clinical findings strongly suggestive of primary pulmonary hypertension or possible pulmonary embolism (or both).  She died of acute right-sided heart failure.  A diagnosis of pulmonary veno-occlusive disease was made at autopsy.  Approximately 100 cases of this disease have been reported previously in the literature.  We describe a patient with a particularly florid progression of this unusual disease.  Death occurred within six weeks of the onset of symptoms.
Ventilatory and diffusion abnormalities in potential heart transplant recipients.  Few data are available concerning pulmonary function in patients with severe chronic congestive heart failure.  Of 315 patients evaluated for potential cardiac transplantation at UCLA, 132 underwent pulmonary function tests.  The latter patients had severe heart failure with a mean left ventricular ejection fraction of 19 percent and mean cardiac index of 2.1 L/min/m2.  Diffusion impairment either alone or combined with restrictive and/or obstructive ventilatory defects occurred in 67 percent of the patients evaluated.  Diffusion impairment occurred as the sole abnormality in 31 percent of the patients and in combination with a restrictive ventilatory defect in 21 percent.  A reduction in diffusing capacity has not been previously described as a frequent finding in patients with chronic congestive heart failure.  In contrast to other studies involving patients with acute heart failure, obstructive ventilatory defects were uncommon.  None of the lung function abnormalities was associated with smoking status, prior drug use, chest roentgenographic changes, hemodynamic findings, or clinical features, including duration of congestive heart failure.  The mechanism for the diffusion impairment is unclear but could be due to chronic passive congestion with pulmonary fibrosis and/or recurrent pulmonary emboli.  Recognition of diffusion impairment as a common finding in patients with severe chronic congestive heart failure who are candidates for heart transplantation is important for proper interpretation of possible post-transplant changes in diffusing capacity due to other causes.
Severe aortic regurgitation as a late complication of temporal arteritis.  Two patients with a remote history of pathologically documented giant cell arteritis developed severe regurgitation.  The first patient developed severe aortic regurgitation five years after the pathologic documentation of giant cell arteritis of the temporal arteries.  Giant cell arteritis involvement of the aortic root was confirmed.  The second patient developed aortic regurgitation seven years after pathologic documentation of giant cell arteries of the temporal arteries.  Although pathologic confirmation of the aortic root process was not obtained, this case strengthens the clinical association between giant cell arteritis of the temporal arteries and subsequent aortic root dilatation and severe aortic regurgitation.  Observation for signs of de novo severe aortic regurgitation is indicated in follow-up of patients with temporal arteritis.
Caliber-persistent artery of the stomach (Dieulafoy's vascular malformation).  Caliber-persistent artery of the stomach (also known as cirsoid aneurysm, Dieulafoy's lesion, and submucosal arterial malformation) is clinically manifested as recurrent, massive, often fatal hematemesis.  The lesion often is not seen endoscopically.  Left gastric angiography in one patient with hematemesis showed a convoluted and ectatic artery in the gastric fundus, which proved to be caliber-persistent artery of the stomach on pathological examination.  The tortuosity of the abnormal vessel in this condition has been attributed to artefactual contraction of the stomach following excision and formalin fixation.  This is the first reported case in which a pathologically proven lesion has been clearly visualized by angiography.  This demonstrates that the submucosal vessel is truly and not artifactually sinuous.  It is proposed that angiographic demonstration of a nontapering, convoluted artery in the territory of the left gastric artery is highly suggestive of caliber-persistent artery of the stomach.
Time course of hemodynamic responses to sodium in elderly hypertensive patients.  Thirty-one patients with essential hypertension (81.6 +/- 6.9 years old) were studied during two different regimens of sodium intake: 120 meq/day for 8 weeks and 344 meq/day for 2 weeks.  Systemic hemodynamic data were measured with Doppler echocardiography from which the mitral flow velocity integral, cardiac index, and total peripheral resistance were calculated.  The salt-sensitive patients in whom the increase in total peripheral resistance was greater than the increase in cardiac index with salt loading were termed SST.  In the salt-sensitive patients termed SSC, the increase in cardiac index was greater than the increase in total peripheral resistance with increased sodium intake.  All SST patients on day 7 of the high sodium diet remained in the SST group on day 14.  Nine of 13 patients in the SSC group on day 7 remained in the SSC group on day 14, and the remaining four patients in the SSC group on day 7 fell into the SST group on day 14.  Four of eight non-salt-sensitive (NSS) patients on day 7 of the high salt regimen remained in the NSS group on day 14, whereas the remaining four patients in the NSS group on day 7 fell into the SSC group on day 14.  Our data suggest a changing pattern with sodium loading of initially high cardiac index followed by a persistently raised total peripheral resistance.  The celiac, superior mesenteric, and renal arteries vasoconstricted with sodium repletion in both SST and SSC patients.  With salt loading, the terminal aortic vascular bed vasodilated in the SSC patients and vasoconstricted in the SST patients.
Two-way factorial study of alcohol and salt restriction in treated hypertensive men.  The aim of this study was to determine whether moderate restriction of dietary salt intake leads to an additional fall in blood pressure in treated hypertensive men who are asked to simultaneously reduce their usual alcohol intake.  Sixty-three subjects entered an initial 2-week familiarization period during which they continued their usual alcohol intake and commenced a "low sodium" diet (less than 60 mmol/day) supplemented with 100 mmol sodium chloride per day as enteric-coated tablets.  Subjects were then randomly assigned to either drink a low alcohol beer alone for a 4-week period (reducing their self-reported alcohol consumption from 537 to 57 ml/week) or to continue their usual alcohol intake (543 versus 557 ml/week).  Within the low and normal alcohol intake groups, subjects were assigned to either a low or normal sodium intake.  The low sodium groups continued the sodium-restricted diet but were switched to placebo sodium chloride tablets for the 4 weeks.  This resulted in a fall in the 24-hour urinary sodium excretion from 144 to 69 mmol/day.  The normal sodium groups continued the low sodium diet but kept taking 100 mmol/day of the sodium chloride tablets, and their urinary sodium excretion remained unchanged (125 versus 142 mmol/day).  Regular antihypertensive therapy was continued throughout.  Fifty-nine subjects completed the trial.  In those who reduced their alcohol intake there was a fall in both systolic blood pressure (-5.4 mm Hg supine, p less than 0.01) and diastolic blood pressure (-3.2 mm Hg supine, p less than 0.01).
Diurnal cardiovascular patterns in spontaneously hypertensive and Wistar-Kyoto rats.  This study was designed to determine whether diurnal patterns of blood pressure, heart rate, or locomotor activity differed among two substrains of Wistar-Kyoto rats, derived originally from Charles River or Taconic Farms stock, or the spontaneously hypertensive rat.  Cardiovascular parameters were continuously monitored over 24 hours.  Resting systolic and diastolic blood pressure values were statistically different among the three groups both during the lights-on (rest) and lights-off (active) phases of the cycle with blood pressure of spontaneously hypertensive rats greater than that of Wistar-Kyoto rats from Taconic Farms, which was greater than that of Wistar-Kyoto rats from Charles River.  The largest difference in arterial pressure between Wistar-Kyoto/Taconic Farms and Wistar-Kyoto/Charles River was during the lights-on period.  Heart rates of all rats decreased during the lights-on period; Wistar-Kyoto/Charles River had the largest decrease (-70 +/- 5 beats/min), Wistar-Kyoto/Taconic Farms had the least (-17 +/- 2 beats/min), and in spontaneously hypertensive rats the decrease was intermediate (-29 +/- 3 beats/min).  The pronounced diurnal variation in pressure and heart rate exhibited by Wistar-Kyoto/Charles River was not present in either Wistar-Kyoto/Taconic Farms or spontaneously hypertensive rats.  Blood pressure magnitude correlated with locomotor activity during both periods, although all groups showed minimal activity during the rest period.  Observed differences between Wistar-Kyoto/Charles River and Wistar-Kyoto/Taconic Farms were not due to a lack of or an abnormality in baroreceptor reflex function.
A kallikrein-like enzyme in blood vessels of one-kidney, one clip hypertensive rats.  Active and inactive kallikrein or a kallikrein-like enzyme are found in the aorta, vena cava, and tail artery and veins of the rat.  We studied the concentration of vascular kininogenase in rats with one-kidney, one clip renovascular hypertension and in unilaterally nephrectomized normotensive rats.  Six weeks after surgery, active and total vascular kininogenase activity (active plus trypsin-activated) was measured.  Blood pressure was 212 +/- 4 mm Hg in the hypertensive rats (n = 33) and 120 +/- 1 mm Hg in the normotensive rats (n = 32) (p less than 0.001).  Active kininogenase was lower in the hypertensive rats; although the difference was not significant in the thoracic aorta (56 +/- 8 versus 77 +/- 15), it was highly significant in the abdominal aorta (63 +/- 13 versus 167 +/- 17, p less than 0.001) and tail artery (48 +/- 8 versus 197 +/- 31, p less than 0.003).  Total vascular kininogenase activity (active plus trypsin-activated) was lower in the hypertensive rats in all arteries examined: thoracic aorta (183 +/- 16 versus 380 +/- 38, p less than 0.003), abdominal aorta (565 +/- 61 versus 1,093 +/- 74, p less than 0.001), and tail artery (532 +/- 112 versus 1,243 +/- 135, p less than 0.003).  Active kininogenase in the vena cava was higher in the hypertensive rats (213 +/- 56 versus 131 +/- 31); however, this difference was not statistically significant, whereas in the tail veins it was highly significant (1,803 +/- 221 versus 771 +/- 79, p less than 0.003).
Interleukin-2 does not attenuate hypertension in spontaneously hypertensive rats.  It was recently reported that interleukin-2, when administered as a single bolus injection (5,000 units/kg), could prevent the development of hypertension in young spontaneously hypertensive rats and lower blood pressure to normotensive levels in spontaneously hypertensive rats with established hypertension.  Consequently, efforts were made to duplicate this finding.  Male spontaneously hypertensive rats (35 days old) were injected subcutaneously with 50,000 units/kg (3,500 units/rat) of recombinant interleukin-2 (Amgen) and had systolic blood pressure measured twice weekly by the tail-cuff technique.  Systolic blood pressure in the interleukin-2-treated group was not significantly different from the vehicle-treated control group at any time point over 32 days of follow-up.  A second injection of recombinant interleukin-2 (5,000 units/kg) was administered 32 days after the first injection.  Again, no reduction in blood pressure was observed in the interleukin-2-treated group over an additional 38 days.  Mean arterial pressure (+/- SEM) measured via intra-arterial cannula in conscious rats at age 105 days (38 days after the second treatment) was 168.5 +/- 3.5 mm Hg in interleukin-2-treated spontaneously hypertensive rats and 170.3 +/- 3.6 mm Hg in vehicle-treated controls.  Both recombinant interleukin-2 preparations conformed to their respective manufacturer's indicated specific activity as determined by the ability of the interleukin-2 to induce proliferation of the interleukin-2-dependent cell line HT-2.  Thus, this study demonstrated that interleukin-2 was ineffective in preventing or attenuating hypertension in spontaneously hypertensive rats.
Effects of differential touch on nervous system arousal of patients recovering from cardiac disease.  Previous research suggests that the neural properties of certain types of touch as well as their perceived significance to the disease state may be related to heightened activation of the nervous system.  In this study the effects of different types of touch on nervous system arousal were examined in 59 adult patients who were receiving treatment for coronary artery disease.  They were exposed to a standardized protocol that systematically varied the neural properties and procedural nature of the touch received.  Measures of cardiovascular reactivity (heart rate and rhythm data as well as blood pressure measurements) and state anxiety were used as indexes of arousal.  The results indicated that all types of touch evoked heart rate deceleration in contrast to both baseline and verbal conditions.  However, there were no differential effects related to either the neural properties or procedural nature of touch.  Diastolic blood pressure and state anxiety were also lower as a result of the touch.  No changes were observed for systolic blood pressure or heart rhythm.  In general, findings suggested that touch served to reduce arousal rather than to produce negative psychophysiologic consequences for recovery.
Torsade de pointes: a critical care nurse's dilemma.  Torsade de pointes is a polymorphous ventricular tachycardia characterized by a gradual change in the direction of the QRS complex.  Because critical care nurses are the first to recognize arrhythmias, they require the knowledge and skill to intervene appropriately.  This case report focuses on identification of the characteristics, contributing factors, therapeutic modalities, and relevant nursing diagnoses for the patient with torsade de pointes.
Role of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in congestive heart failure.  Conventional therapy for congestive heart failure (CHF) includes sodium-restricted diet, diuretics, digitalis, vasodilators, and short-term intravenous administration of beta-adrenergic agonists during episodes of decompensation.  A specific class of vasodilators, the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, has recently gained predominance in the treatment of congestive heart failure.  The primary mechanism of action is to reduce production of angiotensin II by competitive inhibition of the enzyme that converts angiotensin I into angiotensin II.  Reduced levels of angiotensin II, in turn, promote vasodilation and lower aldosterone production.  The benefits of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor therapy in chronic congestive heart failure have been demonstrated by improvement in left ventricular performance, exercise capacity, functional status (using New York Heart Association classification), and survival.
Current results of elective aortic reconstruction for aneurysmal and occlusive disease.  Decisions to resect small aortic aneurysms or employ non-operative treatment for aorto-iliac occlusive disease must depend on current rather than historical surgical results.  To assess current morbidity and mortality, we reviewed 200 consecutive aortic resections in two groups of patients treated from 1981 to 1989: those undergoing elective aortofemoral bypass for occlusive disease (AFB, no.  100) or resection of infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA, no.  100).  Indications for AFB included claudication (54%), rest pain (32%), and gangrene (13%).  AAA size ranged from 3 to 14 cm (mean 6.5 +/- 2.4 cm); 45% presented with abdominal or back pain.  Patients undergoing AFB were younger (AFB 61.5 +/- 10 years vs AAA 68.7 +/- 8.9 years) with a higher incidence of some atherosclerotic risk factors, diabetes mellitus 30% vs 10%, tobacco use 77% vs 49%, hyperlipidemia 21% vs 7%; p less than 0.001).  Coronary artery disease (CAD) was more prevalent in AAA patients (49% vs 34%; p less than 0.001).  Postoperative mortality was not different in occlusive or aneurysmal disease (3% AFB vs 2% AAA), nor was the occurrence of serious complications such as myocardial infarction (2% vs 1%) or pulmonary embolism (2% vs 3%).  Improvements in patient selection, perioperative care and surgical technique have lowered the mortality of elective aortic surgery.  Given the current standard of care, an aggressive approach to AAA even in high risk patients is appropriate.  The low morbidity of AFB for occlusive disease mandates a critical appraisal of less effective nonoperative therapies.
Synchronous reconstruction for combined aortoiliac and femoropopliteal occlusive lesions. The role of proximal bypass.  Between January 1984 and December 1986, 31 patients underwent synchronous revascularization (SR) because of the serious clinical condition of a lower limb and presence of arteriographically visible lesions.  Average follow-up was 30 months.  Operative mortality was 10%.  Two patient populations were identified: Group I (N = 13): patients who underwent ilio-femoral or aorto-femoral proximal revascularization (PR); Group II (N = 18): patients who had axillo-femoral PR.  Group I patients were younger than those in Group II (64 yr versus 72 yr; p less than 0.01).  An association of pre-operative risk factors (arterial hypertension; coronary, renal or respiratory insufficiency) was twice as frequent in Group II as in Group I (p less than 0.02).  The rate of SR compared to PR alone was 15%.  However, there was no statistically significant difference between Groups I and II.  Comparison of the actuarial survival curves for patients ahd the patency rates of SR in Groups I and II failed to reveal any statistically significant differences.  Axillo-femoral bypass can be used for PR when SR is necessary in high risk patients.
Primary repair for complete atrioventricular canal: recommendation for early primary repair.  Forty patients with complete atrioventricular canal (CAVC) underwent primary repair at Fukuoka Children's Hospital in Fukuoka, Japan, between August 1, 1981 and July 31, 1989.  The age at repair ranged from 2 months to 6 years (mean 19 months); weight ranged from 2.3 to 22 kg.  The surgical mortality was 2.5%.  Justification for early primary repair was examined.  Eleven patients underwent repair before 6 months of age (Group 1), 12 patients, between 7 and 11 months of age (Group 2), and 17 patients, after 12 months of age (Group 3).  Degenerative changes in the atrioventricular valve increased significantly as age at repair increased (p less than 0.05 Group 1 versus Group 3).  The incidence of residual mitral regurgitation tended to increase in the order of Group 1, 2 and 3, though the degree ranged from trivial to mild.  Study of the left atrium/aorta ratio by echocardiography revealed that stable values of around 1.1 in Groups 1 and 2 and around 1.3 in Group 3 continued during the follow-up period of 3 years.  Assessment of the diameter of the repaired mitral valve in the mean interval of 26 months in groups 1 and 2 revealed normal growth of the mitral valve annulus.  The angle between the repaired mitral valve and ventricular septum, which can be affected by the growth of the ventricular septum, converged to normal range in the mean interval of 26 months.  Postoperative pulmonary vascular resistance in Groups 2 and 3 was higher at 4.4 +/- 2.3 and 6.3 +/- 2.2, respectively, than in Group 1 at 3.3 +/- 2.2 (p less than 0.01 versus Group 3).
Perioperative myocardial injury in patients undergoing aortic valve replacement.  In cases of myocardial hypertrophy myocardial protection may be insufficient.  In order to determine the factors responsible for myocardial injury we assessed myocardial injury in 54 patients undergoing isolated aortic valve replacement.  In all cases hypothermic cardioplegic arrest was induced.  At 13 different times we measured the serum level of creatine-kinase (CK), myocardial bound creatine-kinase (CKmb), lactic dehydrogenase (LDH), alpha-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase (alpha-HBDH), glutamic oxaloacetic transferase (GOT) and myoglobin.  The mean duration of ischemia was 52.6 +/- 16.2 minutes and the mean time of extracorporeal circulation was 85.85 +/- 20.25 minutes.  By performance of a multiple regression analysis a significant correlation between ischemia and LDH and alpha-HBDH was found; CK, GOT, LDH and alpha-HBDH correlated with duration of extracorporeal circulation.  In none of the patients was a low cardiac output syndrome observed.  From our results we conclude that in our study myocardial protection was sufficient and therefore the detrimental effects of extracorporeal circulation were the determining factors of enzyme release.
Right coronary artery injury during tricuspid valve annuloplasty.  An unusual complication after tricuspid valve annuloplasty is described where a ring suture ligated right coronary artery and precipitated myocardial infarct and patient death.  The need for caution to prevent this complication with such surgery is emphasized.
Multiple breakpoint method for measuring effect of antibiotics on endocarditis strains of streptococci.  The activity of penicillin alone and combined with aminoglycoside on endocarditis strains of streptococci was examined.  Good assay reproducibility was obtained by the use of logarithmic phase cultures standardised by opacity, careful inoculation of well-plates, removal of antibiotic by membrane transfer and incubating survival counts in hydrogen plus carbon dioxide.  The use of 10-fold intervals for penicillin concentration simplified assay design without loss of efficiency.
Improved morphologic characterization of atrial septal aneurysm by transesophageal echocardiography: relation to cerebrovascular events.  Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography was performed in 23 consecutive adult patients with an atrial septal aneurysm.  In three patients with a cerebrovascular event the diagnosis was established by the transesophageal approach only.  Interatrial shunting on transthoracic imaging with use of echocardiographic contrast imaging or Doppler color mapping, or both, was detected in 7 (41%) of 17 patients.  On performing contrast imaging in combination with color flow mapping during transesophageal echocardiography, positive shunting was demonstrated in 15 (83%) of 18 patients.  Echocardiographic identification of multiple fenestrations (n = 4) and thrombus within the aneurysm (n = 2) could be achieved for the first time by transesophageal ultrasound application.  Cerebrovascular events occurred in 12 (52%) of 23 patients and were regarded as being definitely thromboembolic in 10 (43%); 8 (67%) of the 12 patients had repeated cerebral events.  Except for mitral valve prolapse in one patient, no other potential cardiac source of embolism could be identified despite the use of transesophageal echocardiography.  A thickening of the aneurysmal membrane greater than or equal to 5 mm was found in 9 (75%) of 12 patients with versus 3 (27%) of 11 patients without a cerebrovascular event (p less than 0.05); this proved to be the only significant difference between the two patient groups.  The mechanism of embolization may be both primary thrombus formation within the aneurysm and paradoxic embolization through an interatrial communication as demonstrated by the findings in two patients.  It is concluded that atrial septal aneurysm is a cardiac abnormality with thromboembolic potential.  In patients with this lesion and a history of an embolic event, long-term anticoagulant therapy is indicated.
Transesophageal Doppler color flow mapping assessment of atrial septal defect.  Transesophageal Doppler color flow imaging was performed in 19 adult patients (mean age 35 years) with an atrial septal defect demonstrated by cardiac catheterization or at surgery, or both.  The transesophageal study correctly identified and classified 19 of 19 shunts in contrast to 16 of 18 shunts identified by the transthoracic approach.  The area of the atrial septal defect was calculated by assuming it to be circular and taking the maximal Doppler color flow jet width at the defect site as its diameter.  The pulsed Doppler sample volume was placed parallel to the shunt flow direction at the defect site to obtain the mean velocity and flow duration.  From these values, the shunt volume was calculated as a product of the defect area, mean velocity, flow duration and heart rate.  The calculated shunt flow volume obtained by transesophageal study showed a good correlation with shunt flow volume (r = 0.91, p less than 0.001) and pulmonary to systemic blood flow ratio (r = 0.84, p less than 0.001) obtained at cardiac catheterization.  The size of the defect by transesophageal Doppler color flow mapping correlated fairly well with the size estimated at surgery (r = 0.73, p = 0.004).  It is concluded that transesophageal Doppler color flow imaging is useful in the detection and classification of atrial septal defects and in the assessment of shunt volumes.
Outlook after acute myocardial infarction in the very elderly compared with that in patients aged 65 to 75 years   Little is known concerning late outcome and prognostic factors after acute myocardial infarction in the very elderly (greater than 75 years of age).  Accordingly, this study compared the clinical course and mortality rate for up to 1 year in a large multicenter data base that included 702 patients greater than 75 years of age (mean +/- SD 81 +/- 4 years), with a less elderly subset of 1,321 patients between 65 and 75 years of age (mean 70 +/- 3 years).  The postdischarge 1 year cardiac mortality rate was 17.6% for those greater than 75 years of age compared with 12.0% for patients between 65 and 75 years of age (p less than 0.01).  There were differences in the prevalence of several factors, including female gender, history of angina pectoris, history of congestive heart failure, smoking habits and incidence of congestive heart failure during hospitalization.  Multivariate analyses of predictors of cardiac death in hospital survivors selected different factors as important in the two age subgroups; age was selected in the 65 to 75 year age group but was not an independent predictor in the very elderly.  The survival curves beginning at day 10 for patients 65 to 75 and in those greater than 75 years old were similar for up to 90 days but diverged later.  In the very elderly, 63% of late cardiac deaths were sudden or due to new myocardial infarction, similar to the causes of 67% of deaths in the younger age group.
Changes in left ventricular diastolic performance after aortic balloon valvuloplasty: acute and late effects   To evaluate acute and follow-up changes in left ventricular diastolic performance, simultaneous digital left ventriculography and micromanometry were performed in 49 patients undergoing aortic balloon valvuloplasty.  All patients improved symptomatically after valvuloplasty, and 26 returned 6.3 +/- 1.5 months later for follow-up catheterization.  Immediately after valvuloplasty, aortic valve area increased (before 0.5 +/- 0.2 versus after 0.8 +/- 0.2 cm2, p less than 0.01), cardiac output (before 4.3 +/- 1.2 versus after 4.4 +/- 1.3 liters/min) and ejection fraction (before 51 +/- 18% versus after 52 +/- 17%) did not change and diastolic indexes worsened, signified by a decrease in peak filling rate (before 247 +/- 80 versus after 226 +/- 78 ml/s, p less than 0.01) and increase in the time constant of isovolumetric relaxation (tau) (before 78 +/- 29 versus after 96 +/- 40 ms, p less than 0.01) and the modulus of chamber stiffness (before 0.107 +/- 0.071 versus after 0.141 +/- 0.083, p less than 0.01).  At follow-up catheterization, 16 patients continued to have symptomatic improvement (group 1) and 10 had recurrence of symptoms (group 2).  Aortic valve area, cardiac output and ejection fraction at follow-up catheterization in both groups were similar and unchanged from values before valvuloplasty.
Coronary angioplasty in patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction.  The applications for coronary angioplasty have greatly expanded and the procedure is now increasingly used in complex and potentially high risk conditions.  This report describes the short- and long-term effects of coronary angioplasty in 61 patients with severely depressed left ventricular function (ejection fraction less than or equal to 35%) with unstable or refractory anginal symptoms, or both, in whom revascularization was necessary despite increased risk.  In a retrospective analysis of 1,260 patients undergoing angioplasty between January 1985 through December 1987, 61 had an ejection fraction less than or equal to 35%.  The common clinical presentation was unstable angina (70%) with or without recent myocardial infarction.  Mean left ventricular ejection fraction was 27 +/- 6%.  Forty-five patients (74%) had multivessel disease.  Clinical success after angioplasty was achieved in 55 patients (90%).  Major complications (death, infarction and emergency bypass surgery) occurred in five patients (8.2%), with death in two (3.2%).  During long-term (mean 21 +/- 11 months) follow-up study of the 55 patients with successful angioplasty, 13 (23%) died, including 3 of noncardiac causes, and 11 (20%) had clinically symptomatic recurrence.  Continued clinical success was present in 39 patients (71%), of whom 28 (51%) were event-free patients and 11 (20%) had clinical recurrence; a successful second angioplasty procedure was performed in 9 because of restenosis.  Thus, in patients with depressed left ventricular function, coronary angioplasty can be performed with a short-term success rate comparable to that of routine angioplasty or surgical procedures.  However, acute complications are more frequent and the late mortality rate is higher than in patients with less depressed function.
Natural history of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in the elderly.  The prognosis of patients diagnosed as having hypertrophic cardiomyopathy at advanced age has not been well defined.  This study details follow-up information obtained for 95 patients initially diagnosed as having hypertrophic cardiomyopathy at age greater than or equal to 65 years.  Seventy-five percent of patients were symptomatic, as defined by the presence of chest pain, dyspnea or syncope, and the mean ventricular septal thickness was 20 mm.  The median duration of follow-up study was 4.2 years.  The survival rate at 1 and 5 years was 95% and 76%, respectively, which was not significantly different from that an age- and gender-matched control group.  Of patients presenting with New York Heart Association functional class I or II dyspnea, only 18% progressed to class III or IV during the follow-up period.  However, patients presenting with class III dyspnea had a 1 year mortality rate of 36%, significantly higher than that of control subjects (p less than 0.003).  Of the echocardiographic variables, indexed left atrial size was most strongly associated with reduced survival (p less than 0.008).  These results suggest that the prognosis of elderly patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is generally favorable.  Certain clinical and echocardiographic variables appear to be of use in identifying patients with a less favorable prognosis.
Prognostic importance of the serum magnesium concentration in patients with congestive heart failure.  Magnesium abnormalities are common in patients with congestive heart failure but the clinical and prognostic significance of an abnormal serum magnesium concentration in this disorder has not been investigated.  Therefore, the relation between serum magnesium concentration and the clinical characteristics and long-term outcome of 199 patients with chronic heart failure was evaluated.  The serum magnesium concentration was less than 1.6 mEq/liter in 38 patients (19%), within the normal range in 134 patients (67%) and greater than 2.1 mEq/liter in 27 patients (14%).  Patients with hypomagnesemia had more frequent ventricular premature complexes and episodes of ventricular tachycardia than did patients with a normal serum magnesium concentration (p less than 0.05).  Even though the two groups were similar with respect to severity of heart failure and neurohormonal variables, patients with a low serum magnesium concentration had a significantly worse prognosis during long-term follow-up (45% versus 71% 1 year survival, p less than 0.05).  Patients with hypermagnesemia had more severe symptoms, greater neurohormonal activation and worse renal function than did patients with a normal serum magnesium concentration but tended to have fewer ventricular arrhythmias.  Hypermagnesemic patients had a worse prognosis than did those with a normal magnesium concentration (37% versus 71% 1 year survival, p less than 0.05).  In conclusion, the measurement of serum magnesium concentration provides important clinical and prognostic information in patients with chronic heart failure.
Cardiac rhythm disturbances early after orthotopic heart transplantation: prevalence and clinical importance of the observed abnormalities.  To precisely define the incidence, type and consequences of cardiac arrhythmias early after heart transplantation, 25 cardiac transplant recipients were monitored continuously for 728 days from the day of surgery to discharge or death.  A subset of 15 patients had sinus node function studies with overdrive suppression performed weekly at the time of endomyocardial biopsy.  Results revealed sinus bradycardia in 10 patients (40%) and junctional bradycardia in 6 (24%).  Supraventricular tachycardia in the form of atrial tachycardia, atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter occurred in 11 patients (44%).  Ventricular tachycardia occurred in 15 patients (60%) and was nonsustained in all.  Cardiac pacing for 1,403 h was used in nine patients with a pulse rate less than 50 beats/min; seven recovered and permanent pacing was instituted in two.  In the subgroup that had sinus node function studies, seven patients were identified with clinical bradyarrhythmia; each had abnormal sinus node recovery time (greater than 1,400 ms) and abnormal corrected sinus node recovery time (greater than 525 ms) in at least one study.  These seven patients also had a significantly prolonged ischemic time (236 +/- 26 versus 159 +/- 68 min, p less than 0.01).  In conclusion, cardiac arrhythmias, particularly ventricular tachycardia and bradyarrhythmia, occur more commonly early after orthotopic heart transplantation than has previously been reported.  Sinus node dysfunction due to prolonged organ ischemic time, antiarrhythmic drug use or surgical trauma, alone or in combination, may contribute to these arrhythmias.
A new single catheter technique for simultaneous measurement of action potential duration and refractory period in vivo.  In vivo correlations of action potential duration measured by a monophasic action potential catheter and effective refractory period measured by a separate pacing catheter have been poor, probably because of the known variability of both action potential duration and effective refractory period between different ventricular sites.  In this study, a new quadripolar contact electrode catheter designed for simultaneous pacing and monophasic action potential recording at closely adjacent sites (2 mm separation between recording electrodes and pacing electrodes) was tested in five closed chest dogs and four patients.  Dog studies: Pacing thresholds were extremely low, ranging from 0.02 to 0.25 mA (mean +/- SD 0.099 +/- 0.051, n = 36) and were stable over time (less than 20% increase during 1 h of continuous pacing).  Because of the close proximity of pacing and recording electrodes, the pacing artifact nearly coincided with the monophasic action potential upstroke.  Because of the low pacing threshold, however, pacing artifacts were small (33 +/- 17% of the monophasic action potential amplitude at twice diastolic threshold strength) and did not affect the duration or configuration of the simultaneously recorded monophasic action potential.  The short stimulus response time and the undisturbed monophasic action potential signal fidelity during pacing allowed precise simultaneous measurements of action potential duration and effective refractory period at the same endocardial site.
The daylong pattern of the antianginal effect of long-term three times daily administered isosorbide dinitrate   Three times daily administration of isosorbide dinitrate may avoid much of the tolerance seen with more frequent dosing.  To determine the daylong pattern of the antianginal effect of three times daily isosorbide dinitrate, eight men with stable exertional angina and a positive exercise test were studied.  The subjects had demonstrated increased exercise duration in response to oral isosorbide dinitrate therapy and absence of complete tolerance to long-term three times daily isosorbide dinitrate.  Treadmill exercise to onset of angina was performed over 2 days at 8 AM, 9 AM, 11 AM, 1 PM, 2 PM, 4 PM, 6 PM and 7 PM.  On one day each patient received isosorbide dinitrate at 8 AM, 1 PM and 6 PM in a previously titrated dose (mean 27.5 mg), which had been taken three times daily for at least 2 weeks.  On the other day at the same hours each patient received double blind a placebo identical in appearance to isosorbide dinitrate.  One hour after the 8 AM dose of isosorbide dinitrate, mean systolic blood pressure at rest had fallen by 19 mm Hg and mean exercise time to angina increased by 200 s.  However, by 11 AM exercise time had returned to control level.  One hour after the 1 PM dose of isosorbide dinitrate, exercise time increased by a mean of 150 s but was again at control level 2 h later.
Myocardial amiodarone and desethylamiodarone concentrations in patients undergoing cardiac transplantation.  Myocardial amiodarone and desethylamiodarone concentrations were measured at multiple sites in the explanted heart in four patients who underwent cardiac transplantation.  Patients were taking amiodarone, 200 to 400 mg/day (mean 300 +/- 115), for 88 to 428 days (mean 229 +/- 148).  The mean cumulative dose was 58 +/- 21.3 g.  Plasma amiodarone concentration in three subjects was 204, 312 and 419 ng/ml and desethylamiodarone concentration was 268, 513 and 880 ng/ml, respectively.  Significant interindividual variability in myocardial concentrations of amiodarone and desethylamiodarone was observed (p less than 0.05).  Mean myocardial amiodarone concentration ranged from 4 +/- 1.0 to 29 +/- 17.2 micrograms/g (p less than 0.05); mean desethylamiodarone concentration ranged from 22 +/- 8.8 to 141 +/- 102.5 micrograms/g (p less than 0.05).  At each site, save for fat, myocardial desethylamiodarone concentration was higher than amiodarone concentration.  Greater intraindividual variability was observed in myocardial desethylamiodarone compared with amiodarone concentration particularly in septal and scar tissue (p = NS).  No significant relation was found between myocardial concentration and duration of treatment.  In patients with significant ventricular disease, usefulness of plasma amiodarone and desethylamiodarone concentration to estimate myocardial concentration is limited by intra- and interindividual variability.
Effects of benazepril and metoprolol OROS alone and in combination on myocardial ischemia in patients with chronic stable angina   The efficacy of benazepril, metoprolol OROS and their combination was evaluated in 29 patients (42 to 74 years of age) with chronic stable angina and documented coronary artery disease in a placebo-controlled, double-blind, crossover trial using serial quantitated exercise testing and ambulatory electrocardiographic (ECG) monitoring.  The mean (+/- SEM) exercise time was 8.5 +/- 0.7 min with placebo, 8.3 +/- 0.6 min (95% confidence interval [CI]-1.06 to 0.54) with benazepril, 9.4 +/- 0.5 min (95% CI -0.32 to 2.14) with metoprolol OROS and 9.6 +/- 0.5 min (95% CI -0.25 to 2.47) with the combination of benazepril and metoprolol OROS.  The mean exercise time to the development of 1 mm ST segment depression was prolonged from 6.0 +/- 0.6 min with placebo to 6.3 +/- 0.6 min (95% CI -0.93 to 1.45) with benazepril, 7.9 +/- 0.5 min (95% CI 0.83 to 3.0) with metoprolol OROS and 8.1 +/- 0.6 min (95% CI 0.88 to 3.29) with the combination of benazepril and metoprolol OROS.  Benazepril did not alter the rest or maximal heart rate, whereas metoprolol OROS alone and in combination significantly lowered the heart rate at rest and during maximal exercise.  Systolic blood pressure at rest was nonsignificantly reduced, whereas diastolic blood pressure was lowered significantly by all treatments in comparison with placebo.  At maximal exercise, only metoprolol OROS, whether given alone or in combination with benazepril, was able to blunt significantly systolic blood pressure and rate-pressure product.
Does intracoronary infusion of Fluosol-DA 20% prevent left ventricular diastolic dysfunction during coronary balloon angioplasty?  Distal intracoronary infusion of the perfluorochemical Fluosol-DA 20% has been shown to prevent systolic dysfunction during coronary artery balloon occlusion in coronary angioplasty.  To assess its effect on global diastolic dysfunction, a randomized, single-blind, crossover protocol comparing intracoronary infusion of Fluosol or no infusion (control) was performed during 60 s balloon inflations in 10 patients (mean age 67 years) undergoing coronary angioplasty.  Assessment of global systolic and diastolic function was obtained with high fidelity micromanometer measurements of left ventricular pressure.  Eighteen pairs of balloon inflations (Fluosol versus control) were analyzed.  Patients reported significantly less severe chest pain during inflations accompanied by Fluosol compared with control.  However, during coronary balloon occlusion, no significant differences in the changes from baseline values were observed between Fluosol and control with regard to ventricular relaxation, including the time constant of early ventricular relaxation (tau) and maximal rate of fall in left ventricular pressure (maximal negative dP/dt).  No differences between Fluosol and control were observed in terms of the increase in end-diastolic pressure or minimal diastolic pressure during balloon inflation.  Mean systolic pressure decrease from baseline values was greater during control than during Fluosol inflations (-9.0 +/- 3.3 mm Hg, p = 0.013), but no significant difference was observed in the change in maximal rate of rise in left ventricular pressure (maximal positive dP/dt).  These results suggest that Fluosol does not preserve global left ventricular diastolic function during coronary balloon occlusion, possibly because of its limited oxygen delivery capability relative to arterial blood.
Early and late effects of captopril treatment after large myocardial infarction in rats.  The early (after 21 days) and late (after 4 months) effects of continuous treatment with captopril on left ventricular performance, weight and volumes were studied in rats with myocardial infarction.  Early effects were examined in rats subjected to coronary ligation and randomized to either immediate treatment with captopril (2 g/liter drinking water) starting 2 h after surgery or no treatment.  After 21 days, the treated group showed reductions in mean arterial, left ventricular systolic and left ventricular end-diastolic pressures compared with untreated rats.  Right and left ventricular weight and left ventricular volumes were decreased and the ejection fraction index was increased by captopril treatment.  To study the late effects of captopril, a second group of rats was randomized to immediate captopril treatment (starting 2 h after surgery), delayed captopril treatment (starting 21 days after surgery) or no treatment.  When studied after 4 months of treatment, rats started on captopril treatment 2 h after infarction showed no differences compared with rats started on treatment 21 days after infarction.  Treatment with captopril for 4 months produced changes that were similar to those in rats treated for 21 days.  Captopril treatment improved hemodynamic function after myocardial infarction in rats examined after either 21 days or 4 months of treatment.  The extent of the benefit was similar in the two treatment periods.  Initiation of captopril therapy immediately after infarction did not appear to produce a greater effect than treatment started at 21 days after infarction in rats studied after the drug had been administered for 4 months.
Echocardiographic definition of the left ventricular centroid. II. Determination of the optimal centroid during systole in normal and infarcted hearts.  Although two-dimensional echocardiography is widely used in both clinical and experimental evaluations of regional cardiac wall motion, there is no established clinical method for quantitative analysis of the wall motion, not even for the normal radial motion observed in short-axis images.  Measurement of radial wall motion requires determination of a centroid from which the radii emanate.  Depending on its definition, the centroid is variously affected throughout systole by cardiac translation, regional wall motion and any shift of the subject position or transducer.  A floating centroid is defined relative to the ventricular walls frame by frame, whereas a fixed centroid never moves with respect to the transducer.  Evaluation of the best approach to definition of a centroid was previously presented (part I, this issue).  The next question is how to use the centroid.  This study examines which of four centroid applications provides the best reference for quantifying regional wall motion during systole.  Method 1 is a floating centroid (defined separately for every image frame), method 2 uses the end-diastolic centroid as a fixed reference for all image frames, method 3 uses the end-systolic centroid as a fixed reference and method 4 uses the average as a fixed reference.  Wall motion was measured with respect to each of these centroids by determining radial wall motion from end-diastole to end-systole and correlating radial motion throughout the cardiac cycle with that in normal control hearts.
Dietary preference for sweet foods in patients with dementia   Using a telephone survey, patients with probable Alzheimer's disease (n = 31) and vascular dementia (n = 14) were compared with elderly normal controls (n = 43) in preferences for different foods.  Patients with Alzheimer's disease had a greater preference than normal controls for relatively high-fat, sweet foods and for high-sugar, low-fat foods, but did not significantly differ in preference for other foods, including those high in complex carbohydrates and protein.  Vascular dementia patients showed a similar pattern, not significantly different from that for Alzheimer's patients.  Results did not consistently support a hypothesis that increased sweet preference is a nonspecific form of disinhibited behavior related to declining mental status, nor was a hypothesis relating sweet preference to serotonin activity within the brain consistently supported.  Results provide preliminary evidence that craving for sweet food may be a significant part of the clinical syndrome of dementia, but further research is needed to delineate the psychological and biological mechanisms accounting for it.
Neuropsychological outcome of survivors of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.  Thirty patients resuscitated from out-of-hospital cardiac arrest (15 with and 15 without postanoxic coma on admission) underwent a clinical examination and neuropsychological testing.  In order to assess quality of life, they were compared to two matched control groups; 15 patients with previous myocardial infarction and 15 healthy subjects.  None of the survivors showed severe neurologic impairment, and all had returned to self-sufficient physical activity.  However, the behavior rating scale scores were significantly worse in patients with postanoxic coma.  The processing ability linked to memory was significantly worse in the postanoxic coma group.  Mood disorders were also observed in this group, but they did not have pathological significance.  The remarkably low incidence of neurologic and psychological sequelae in these resuscitated patients, particularly in those with early clinical evidence of severe cerebral damage, is an encouraging result that supports the therapeutic systems development and efforts in the management of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.
Traumatic rupture of the thoracic aorta presenting as transient paraplegia.  A patient involved in a high-speed motor vehicle accident presented paraplegic to the emergency department.  He was noted to have an abnormal chest x-ray and, subsequently, underwent aortography which revealed aortic transection.  The patient's paraplegia resolved spontaneously prior to definitive aortic repair hours later.  Aortic rupture presenting as paraplegia is a rare association, but one an emergency physician should be cognizant of, especially in the case of blunt or decelerating trauma.
Lower extremity venography with iohexol: results and complications.  The frequency of side effects of a nonionic contrast agent (iohexol) was studied in 463 consecutive patients who underwent venography for clinically suspected deep-vein thrombosis (DVT) and compared with the frequency of adverse reactions of another series in which patients received either the same contrast material or a high-osmolar ionic compound.  Minor side effects, including local pain and discomfort, nausea and vomiting, dizziness, skin reactions, superficial phlebitis, and edema, occurred in 83 patients (17.9%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 15%-22%).  The only serious adverse reaction (bronchospasm) was seen in two patients (0.4%; 95% CI, 0.1%-1.4%).  Postvenographic thrombosis confirmed by means of repeat venography occurred in one of 41 consecutive patients with a previous normal venogram (incidence, 2%; 95% CI, 0%-13%).  The frequency of side effects appears to be significantly less than when conventional high-osmolar contrast agents are used.  Use of iohexol for venography is associated with minor side effects in approximately one-fifth of patients, and serious adverse reactions necessitating therapy are rare.
Mitral stenosis: evaluation with MR imaging after percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty.  To evaluate the pathoanatomic findings of mitral valve stenosis and changes after percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty (PBV), magnetic resonance (MR) imaging was performed in 23 patients.  The patients were imaged with a 2.0-T system within 1 week before and 3-10 days after PBV.  The angle of the interatrial septum was measured on the transverse image to facilitate a successful transseptal puncture.  On MR images, the mean transverse and anteroposterior diameters of the left atrium at the level of the aortic root in the ventricular diastolic phase decreased significantly after PBV.  Areas of flow-related intraluminal signal intensity detected in the left atrial cavity of 17 patients (74%) before the procedure disappeared in 15 patients after the procedure.  Other MR imaging findings after PBV were the disappearance of intraluminal signal intensity in the pulmonary artery, normal curvature of the interatrial and interventricular septa, and pericardial effusion as a complication.  MR imaging was thought to provide useful information before and after PBV in patients with mitral stenosis.
Vena caval flow: assessment with cine MR velocity mapping.  The authors used cine magnetic resonance (MR) velocity mapping to study flow in the superior vena cava (SVC) and inferior vena cava (IVC) of 13 healthy control subjects and 13 patients with right-sided cardiac disease.  In the control subjects, peaks of flow in systole and diastole were observed, and mean SVC flow was 35% of the cardiac output.  Respiratory gating was used in six control subjects to acquire images at end inspiration and end expiration, and although the systolic peak was reduced at end expiration, total flow was unchanged.  A reduced systolic peak and retrograde flow in the IVC were observed in patients with tricuspid regurgitation.  A reduced diastolic peak was seen in patients with pulmonary hypertension, pericardial constriction, and right ventricular dysplasia, reflecting reduced diastolic compliance of the right ventricle.  In the patient with obstruction of the SVC, absence of flow was confirmed, and retrograde flow was seen in the azygos vein.  The authors believe that cine MR velocity mapping is a reliable method of studying vena caval flow noninvasively and that it has important potential applications for the investigation of disorders of the right side of the heart.
Evolution of deep venous thrombosis: a prospective evaluation with US.  Forty-six patients with a diagnosis of acute deep venous thrombosis (DVT) established by means of duplex ultrasound (US) were prospectively followed up with serial duplex US examinations during a 6-month period to assess the persistence of venous abnormalities.  All patients were asymptomatic.  Isolated popliteal DVT was found to be more likely to revert to normal at duplex compression US than thrombosis involving both the femoral and popliteal systems (P less than .05).  Increased venous diameter was a sign of acute clot (P less than .005).  Clot echogenicity did not help to enable distinction of acute DVT and chronic DVT.  At compression US, 10 of 21 patients (48%) who initially had occlusive thrombosis had persistent abnormalities that mimicked findings consistent with acute DVT.  Chronic venous changes that persisted after 6 months consisted of either lumen recanalization (with resultant intimal thickening) or persistent venous occlusion.  Both of these conditions can result in incomplete compression, the major US indication of acute DVT.  This appearance should not be confused with that of acute DVT.  Follow-up examinations to establish a baseline appearance can be obtained as early as 6 months after an acute episode of DVT.
Fate of patients undergoing transluminal angioplasty for lower-limb ischemia.  A prospective study of 370 patients who underwent 500 percutaneous transluminal angioplasties (PTAs) for lower-limb ischemia over a 7-year period was performed.  A 97% follow-up rate was achieved.  The first PTA was successful in 188 patients (51%).  Of the failures, 31% were failed attempts at dilation and 73% occurred within 1 month of intervention.  Of the patients with failed PTA, 39% underwent bypass surgery and 24% underwent amputation.  The 30-day mortality rate was 3%, with 1% of the deaths attributed to PTA.  The survival rate at 5 years for the successes was double that for the failures (P less than .0005).  The best results were in femoropopliteal stenoses with two or three patent calf vessels (cumulative patency rate, 78% at 3 years) and the worst in femoropopliteal occlusions with one or no patent calf vessels (cumulative patency rate, 25% at 3 years).  Log rank tests on the life-table data were used to show factors favoring a good outcome.  It is concluded that PTA is the treatment of first choice in suitable patients and, although the failure of intervention in critical ischemia has a significant risk, it is a valuable addition to the therapeutic options in patients with little chance of surgical treatment.
Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty of crural arteries.  The authors dilated 103 stenosed crural arteries in 71 patients.  Primary success was defined as traversing and reducing the lesion to a residual stenosis of less than 30%.  This was achieved in 96% of cases.  Complications included one vessel rupture and one occluding intimal flap, which were treated by the vascular surgeon with bypass and venous patch, respectively.  One hematoma at the puncture site was treated surgically because of its size.  With modern materials such as steerable guide wires and low-profile balloon catheters, dilation of crural arteries has become safe.  Until now, the indications for percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) of crural arteries have been limited to Fontaine stages III and IV disease.  The authors believe that the indications for PTA in Fontaine stage IIb disease are justified, especially if intervention improves outflow after a more proximal recanalizing procedure is performed.
Angioplasty from the contralateral approach: use of a guiding catheter and coaxial angioplasty balloons.  An 8-F guiding catheter has been developed for use with coaxial angioplasty balloon catheters in angioplasty of the femoral artery from the contralateral approach when antegrade puncture of the ipsilateral femoral artery is not possible.  The catheter may be used for angioplasty of the femoral artery bifurcation and the superficial femoral artery and for arterial stenoses in patients with renal transplants.
Irrigation device for neuroangiographic procedures.  A simple irrigation device for use in diagnostic and interventional neuroangiographic procedures is described.  The device is used to flush bubbles and blood clots from catheter hubs.  The authors also describe a technique in which this device can be used to prevent filling a catheter with air when a guide wire is removed.
Response of spinal cord blood flow and motor and sensory evoked potentials to aortic ligation.  To produce spinal cord ischemia in the lamb, ligation of the thoracic aorta was performed for 15, 30, and 45 minutes in three animals each.  Spinal cord blood flow and motor and sensory evoked potentials were measured before, during, and after aortic ligation.  Ischemia with a blood flow of zero during ligation was encountered in the thoracic and lumbar cords, followed by hyperemia upon release of the ligature.  Both somatosensory and motor evoked potentials were obliterated during aortic ligation and gradually recovered following resumption of flow.  Motor and sensory evoked potentials behaved similarly to high aortic ligation.
Lower extremity percutaneous transluminal angioplasty: multifactorial analysis of morbidity and mortality.  We analyzed the outcome of 202 percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) procedures performed between 1983 and 1989 to quantitate procedural risks and define factors associated with suboptimal results or immediate clinical failure.  Premorbid factors studied included age, sex, treatment of single versus multiple lesions, stenoses versus occlusions, premorbid status of the limb (claudication vs limb threat), and most distal level of PTA.  Adverse outcomes included complications (hematoma, acute occlusion, or thrombosis of PTA site, distal embolization, failure to dilate or cross, arterial dissection, rupture, and significant systemic derangement), major amputations (below knee and above knee), and deaths.  There were 66 complications (32.7%), 22 amputations (10.9%), and 12 deaths (5.9%) in our series.  Logistic regression analysis revealed that the major predictive variable for the occurrence of a complication (p = 0.002), and the only predictive variable for the outcomes of amputation and death (p = 0.0001 and p = 0.0139, respectively), was the premorbid clinical status of the limb.  Lower extremity PTA is not an intrinsically benign procedure and is associated with a significant risk of complication, amputation, and procedure-associated death.  These adverse outcomes cluster in patients with limb threat.  Therefore it may be reasonable to restrict the use of PTA to patients with claudication and strictly selected cases of limb threat.
Hemodynamics in internal carotid artery occlusion examined by positron emission tomography.  Using positron emission tomography in nine patients with minor strokes, unilateral internal carotid artery occlusion, and good collateral circulation through the anterior portion of the circle of Willis, we analyzed regional cerebral blood flow, cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen, oxygen extraction fraction, and cerebral blood volume.  These studies allowed quantification of the regional hemodynamic status, especially in relation to watershed areas.  Compared with eight normal controls, the patients had significantly (p less than 0.01) decreased regional cerebral blood flow in the middle cerebral artery territory and the surrounding watershed areas of the occluded hemisphere.  The oxygen extraction fraction rose with the distance from the anterior portion of the circle of Willis, attaining the highest value in the superior parietal and posterior temporo-occipital watershed area.  A concomitant decrease in the cerebral blood flow/cerebral blood volume ratio suggested reduction in the mean blood flow velocity, whereby elevated blood viscosity would be more liable to reduce cerebral blood flow.  These findings suggest hemodynamic vulnerability of the watershed areas after internal carotid artery occlusion in persons with good collateral circulation through the anterior portion of the circle of Willis.  Our results also emphasize the importance of systemic hemodynamic factors such as blood pressure and circulating blood volume in the genesis of watershed infarction.
Pharmacologic irreversible narrowing in chronic cerebrovasospasm in rabbits is associated with functional damage.  We studied isolated basilar artery segments from a rabbit model of chronic cerebrovasospasm.  Autologous blood placed around the basilar artery of rabbits killed 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 9 days later caused narrowing of the segments with a biphasic time course.  The first (immediate) phase was reversed by intra-arterial papaverine; the second phase exhibited an increasing component of narrowing that was papaverine-insensitive.  Based on the passive force/length curves, basilar artery segments became increasingly stiff over 9 days.  By contrast, the segments' contractility decreased.  Responses of the basilar artery segments were greater over the first few days, but then became less than that of saline-injected controls.  Contractions in response to norepinephrine and potassium were reduced.  Endothelium-based acetylcholine-induced vasodilation progressively diminished, as did the response to sympathetic nerve stimulation.  There was a negative correlation between artery wall stiffness and contractility.  The papaverine-insensitive component of angiographic narrowing correlated directly with loss of contractility and with artery wall stiffness.  These results are consistent with the conclusion that increased artery wall stiffness is a primary determining factor in the arterial narrowing of chronic cerebrovasospasm.
Two cases of spontaneous internal carotid artery occlusion due to giant intracranial carotid artery aneurysm.  Although spontaneous thrombosis of a giant intracranial aneurysm is relatively common, occlusion of its parent artery is rare.  We describe two recent patients in whom the parent artery spontaneously occluded.  One patient had severe stenosis of the left internal carotid artery, with delayed appearance of a faint shadow of vascular widening near the posterior clinoid process.  One month later, complete occlusion of the left internal carotid artery was shown angiographically.  The second patient had dysarthria and left hemiparesis, resulting in the diagnosis of a left internal carotid artery giant aneurysm.  He had suffered an episode of visual disturbance of the right eye 5 years before.  Angiography showed the right cervical internal carotid artery to be occluded.  We believe the mechanism of parent artery occlusion in our two patients to be due first to stretching of the internal carotid artery by the enlarged aneurysm, followed by compression of the internal carotid artery by the aneurysm itself.  Next, the anterior clinoid process and the optic nerve are involved, and, finally, thrombosis of the aneurysmal cavity extends into the internal carotid artery itself.
Prostaglandins, the kidney, and hypertension   Prostaglandins are part of the family of oxygenated metabolites of arachidonic acid known collectively as eicosanoids.  While they are formed, act, and are inactivated locally and rarely circulate in plasma, they can affect blood flow in some tissues and so might contribute to the control of peripheral vascular resistance.  Few studies have shown any derangement of total body prostaglandin synthesis or metabolism in hypertension, but increased renal synthesis of one prostanoid, thromboxane A2, has been noted in spontaneously hypertensive rats and some hypertensive humans.  This potent vasoconstrictor may account for the increased renal vascular resistance and suppressed plasma renin activity seen in many patients with hypertension.  Increased renal vascular resistance could increase the blood pressure directly as a component of total peripheral resistance or indirectly by increasing glomerular filtration fraction and tubular sodium reabsorption.  Specific thromboxane synthesis inhibitors not only decrease renal thromboxane production but also increase renal vasodilator prostaglandin synthesis when prostaglandin synthesis is stimulated.  This redirection of renal prostaglandin synthesis toward prostacyclin might be of benefit in correcting a fundamental renal defect in patients with hypertension.
Time delays in the diagnosis and treatment of acute myocardial infarction: a tale of eight cities. Report from the Pre-hospital Study Group and the Cincinnati Heart Project.  To establish the magnitude of prehospital and hospital delays in initiating thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction, the time from telephone 911 emergency medical system (EMS) activation to treatment and its components were analyzed from eight separate ongoing trials.  This included estimates of ambulance response time, prehospital evaluation and treatment time, and time from admission to the hospital to initiation of thrombolytic therapy.  The average time from EMS activation to patient arrival at the hospital was prospectively determined to be 46.1 +/- 8.2 minutes in 3715 patients from eight centers.  The time from admission to the hospital to initiation of thrombolytic therapy was retrospectively determined to be 83.8 +/- 55.0 minutes in a separate group of 730 patients from six centers.  Both the prehospital and hospital time delays were much longer than those perceived by paramedics and emergency department directors.  Shorter hospital time delays were observed in patients in whom a prehospital ECG was obtained as part of a protocol-driven prehospital diagnostic strategy and a diagnosis of acute infarction made before arrival at the hospital (36.3 +/- 11.3 minutes in 13 patients).  These results show that the magnitude of time required to evaluate, transport, and initiate thrombolytic therapy will preclude initiation of treatment to most patients within the first hour of symptoms.  Implementation of a protocol-driven prehospital diagnostic strategy may be associated with a reduction in time to thrombolytic therapy.
Intracoronary adenosine administration during reperfusion following 3 hours of ischemia: effects on infarct size, ventricular function, and regional myocardial blood flow.  Previous studies have demonstrated that adenosine significantly enhances myocardial salvage after 90 minutes of regional ischemia.  To determine its effect after prolonged ischemia, closed-chest dogs underwent 3 hours of left anterior descending artery occlusion followed by 72 hours of reperfusion.  Intracoronary adenosine (3.75 mg/min; at 1.5 ml/min:total volume = 90 ml; n = 10) or an equivalent volume of saline (1.5 ml/min: total volume = 90 ml; n = 9) was infused into the left main coronary artery during the first 60 minutes of reperfusion.  Regional myocardial blood flow was assessed serially with microspheres and regional ventricular function was assessed by contrast ventriculography.  Infarct size was determined histologically.  Light and electron microscopy were utilized to assess neutrophil infiltration and microvascular injury.  Adenosine failed to reduce infarct size expressed as a percentage of the area at risk (38.0 +/- 4.9% versus 34.8 +/- 4.6%; p = NS) or to improve regional ventricular function as measured by the radial shortening method (3.2 +/- 1.8% versus 2.2 +/- 3.1%; p = NS) at 72 hours after reperfusion.  Vasodilatory effects were not observed in the endo- and midmyocardial regions of the ischemic zone during adenosine administration.  This was associated with a similar extent of capillary endothelial changes and neutrophil infiltration in both adenosine-treated and saline control groups.  These results suggest that severe functional abnormalities are present in the vasculature after 3 hours of ischemia and that adenosine therapy is ineffective in enhancing myocardial salvage.
Clinical significance of plasminogen activator inhibitor activity in patients with exercise-induced ischemia.  To assess the fibrinolytic system in patients with exercise-induced ischemia and its relation to ischemia and severity of coronary artery disease (CAD), 47 patients with CAD confirmed by results of coronary angiography underwent symptom-limited multistage exercise thallium-201 emission computed tomography.  All patients with CAD had exercise-induced ischemia as assessed from thallium-201 images.  Pre- and peak exercise blood samples from each patient and preexercise blood samples from control subjects were assayed for several fibrinolytic components and were also assayed for plasma adrenaline.  The extent of ischemia was defined as delta visual uptake score (total visual uptake score in delayed images minus total visual uptake score in initial images) and the severity of CAD as the number of diseased vessels.  In the basal condition, plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI) activity was significantly higher in patients with exercise-induced ischemia as compared to control subjects (p less than 0.01), although there were no significant differences in other fibrinolytic variables between the two groups.  Moreover, PAI activity in the basal condition displayed a significantly positive correlation with the extent of ischemia (r = 0.47, p less than 0.01).  Patients with exercise-induced ischemia were divided into two groups (24 with single-vessel disease and 23 with multivessel disease).  There were no significant differences in coronary risk factors, hemodynamics, or plasma adrenaline levels during exercise between single-vessel and multivessel disease except that delta visual uptake score was significantly higher in multivessel disease (p less than 0.01).
Comparison of coronary angiography and early oral dipyridamole thallium-201 scintigraphy in patients receiving thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction.  We evaluated 50 consecutive patients who received thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction using thallium-201 single photon emission computed tomography in combination with oral dipyridamole (300 mg) to assess the frequency of residual myocardial ischemia.  Thallium studies were performed early after myocardial infarction at a mean of 4.6 days (range 3 to 11) in 50 patients.  The time from the onset of chest pain to the administration of thrombolytic therapy was 2.6 hours (range 0.5 to 5.5).  Q wave myocardial infarction was evident in 46 patients; four patients had a non-Q wave infarction (anterior infarction in 31 patients and inferior infarction in 19 patients).  The serum mean peak creatinine kinase was 1503 IU/L (range 127 to 6500).  Coronary angiography was performed in all patients at a mean of 3.1 days (range 2 to 10) and revealed the infarct-related vessel to be patent in 36 patients (72%).  The ejection fraction was 48% (range 26% to 67%).  After dipyridamole administration, 13 patients (26%) developed angina that was easily reversed with the administration of intravenous aminophylline.  Systolic blood pressure decreased from 122 to 115 mm Hg (p less than 0.05) and the heart rate increased from 76 to 85 beats/min (p less than 0.05).  None of the patients had significant hypotension, arrhythmias, or evidence of infarct extension.  Perfusion abnormalities were present on the initial thallium images in 48 patients.  Redistribution suggestive of ischemia was present in 36 patients (72%).  Ischemia confined to the vascular distribution of the infarct vessel was evident in 22 patients.  Seven patients had ischemia in the infarct zone as well as in a remote myocardial segment.  Thus 29 patients (58%) had ischemia in the distribution of the infarct vessel.  Ischemia in the infarct zone was evident in 19 of 36 patients (53%) with open infarct vessels and in 10 of 14 patients (71%) with occluded infarct vessels.  In conclusion, thallium-201 single photon emission computed tomography using oral dipyridamole was safely performed in patients with recent myocardial infarctions who receive thrombolytic therapy.
Prolongation of ventricular refractoriness by class Ia antiarrhythmic drugs in the prevention of ventricular tachycardia induction.  The effects of class la antiarrhythmic drugs (procainamide, quinidine) on the right ventricular effective refractory period (VERP) and intraventricular conduction time were assessed during serial invasive electrophysiologic studies for sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT).  In 47 patients with remote myocardial infarction, sustained VT was inducible by up to two extrastimuli after the basic drive at one of two basic cycle lengths at the right ventricular apex.  With oral drug administration, sustained VT was no longer inducible (group I) in 27 patients but remained inducible (group II) in 20 with the same protocol.  Class la drugs prolonged the VERP in both groups, but there was greater lengthening when drugs were effective (e.g., +32 +/- 14 msec in group I vs +12 +/- 19 msec in group II; p less than 0.005, basic cycle length 600 to 700 msec).  Prolongation of the VERP by greater than 30 msec had an 88% positive predictive value for prevention of sustained VT induction.  In all except one patient in group I, drugs prolonged the VERP such that the coupling intervals that had resulted in sustained VT induction under control conditions were no longer attainable.  In contrast, conduction time through the ventricle (surface QRS duration) in sinus rhythm and during right ventricular pacing was prolonged similarly regardless of efficacy (e.g., +33 +/- 21 msec vs +27 +/- 27 msec at a cycle length of 400 msec).  The presence of similar plasma levels of drug did not imply equivalent prolongation of the VERP in the two groups.  These results suggest that greater prolongation of the VERP by oral procainamide or quinidine correlates with drug efficacy against VT induction and is a better predictor of drug effect than achievement of a "therapeutic plasma level.".
Left ventricular end-systolic stress-volume index ratio in aortic and mitral regurgitation with normal ejection fraction.  To evaluate the left ventricular contractile state in regurgitant valvular disease with normal ejection fraction, we analyzed the end-systolic stress-volume index relationship (ESSVR) by means of cineangiography in 15 normal subjects, 11 patients with aortic regurgitation (AR), and 10 patients with mitral regurgitation (MR) whose ejection fraction (EF) was 60% or more.  The end-systolic stress-volume index ratio in normal subjects was 5.57 +/- 0.60 kdyne/cm5/m2 (mean +/- standard deviation), and we defined the range including +/- 2 standard deviations of the ratio as the normal ESSVR range.  Six patients with AR and five patients with MR placed inside the normal ESSVR range, termed AR IN and MR IN, but the remaining five patients with AR and MR placed to the right of the normal range, termed AR OUT and MR OUT.  EF did not differ between patients with AR IN and AR OUT (69.4 +/- 5.4 verus 70.7 +/- 6.1%) and between MR IN and MR OUT (71.6 +/- 3.6 versus 71.1 +/- 7.9%).  The EF of the subdivided groups with AR and MR also did not differ from that of normal subjects (70.7 +/- 7.3%).  This finding showed that the left ventricular contractile state was depressed in patients with AR OUT and MR OUT despite a normal EF.  In AR and MR the end-systolic stress and end-systolic volume index of OUT did not differ from those of IN, but the end-diastolic volume index of OUT was larger than that of IN (AR OUT 156.8 +/- 27.9 versus AR IN 110.8 +/- 24.1 ml/m2, MR OUT 160.5 +/- 44.7 versus MR IN 101.0 +/ 16.6 ml/m2; both p less than 0.05), and the regurgitant fraction of OUT was higher than that of IN (AR OUT 52.6 +/- 13.6 versus AR IN 29.7 +/- 13.3%, MR OUT 52.9 +/- 10.2 versus MR IN 30.2 +/- 11.4%; both p less than 0.05).  In addition, there was a linear inverse correlation between the end-systolic stress-volume index ratio and the end-diastolic volume index in all subjects (r = -0.82, n = 36).  In normal subjects there was a linear inverse correlation between end-systolic stress and the EF (r = -0.91, n = 15), but this relationship failed to separate patients with OUT from those with IN.  Results of the present study suggest that some patients with AR and MR whose EF was normal had a depressed contractile state, and these patients had a large end-diastolic volume index and a high regurgitant fraction.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
Maximal oxygen uptake in severe aortic regurgitation: a different view of left ventricular function.  Respiratory gas exchange was used to assess left ventricular (LV) function in 22 patients with severe aortic regurgitation (19 men and three women, aged 18 and 70 years, mean 49 years).  Anaerobic threshold and symptom-limited maximal oxygen consumption (VO2 max) were measured during treadmill exercise, and the results were compared with conventional echocardiographic and radionuclide indices of LV systolic function.  The results were considered with respect to the patients' New York Heart Association functional class.  Both rest and exercise LV ejection fractions were variable, but the mean results were similar in all classes.  The echocardiographic indices of LV cavity dimensions, fractional shortening, radius/thickness ratio, and systolic wall stress also showed a wide range but with similar mean results in each class.  In contrast, VO2 max and anaerobic threshold showed a relationship to functional class.  VO2 max was 32.4 +/- 3.4 ml/kg/min in age-matched control subjects; in the patients it was 27.9 +/- 4.7 in class I, 24.7 +/- 5.7 in class II, and 14.2 +/- 2 in the combined class III/IV.  Results in patients in classes I and II were similar, but both groups were significantly different from control subjects (p less than 0.05) and from patients in class III/IV (p less than 0.01).  About half of the patients with moderate LV dysfunction (judged by reduced VO2 max) were asymptomatic, and LV function was impaired in 4 of 10 patients in class I.  Thus, unlike conventional indices of LV function, VO2 max appeared capable of distinguishing patients with moderate-to-severe LV dysfunction from those with little or no LV dysfunction.  Measurement of respiratory gas exchange appears to be a valid and useful supplementary means of assessing LV function in severe aortic regurgitation.  Further long-term evaluation is required.
Contribution of transesophageal echocardiography to patient diagnosis and treatment: a prospective analysis.  The capability of transesophageal (TEE) versus transthoracic (TTE) echocardiography as a diagnostic tool in clinical practice was prospectively examined in 86 consecutive cases.  A conclusive diagnosis was possible in 95% with TEE, whereas the same result was achieved in 48% by TTE.  Specifically, TEE provided a conclusive diagnosis in 14 of 16 cases of infective endocarditis, while TTE gave this result in 4 of the 16 cases (p less than 0.001).  Similarly, TEE allowed a conclusive diagnosis in 11 of 11 instances of aortic dissection, while TTE gave this indication in two cases (p less than 0.001).  TEE was similarly effective in eight of eight cases of atrial thrombi, whereas TTE gave the diagnosis in three of eight cases (p less than 0.01).  In five subjects with intracardiac masses, TEE gave a conclusive diagnosis in all five, whereas TTE was able to diagnose conclusively in one subject (p less than 0.02).  In seven patients with mitral regurgitation, TEE gave the conclusive diagnosis in all seven and TTE was able to provide this information in four (p = NS).  TEE was able to provide a conclusive diagnosis in four patients with aortic insufficiency, and TTE gave the same information in two of the four (p = NS).  In 14 patients with prosthetic valve dysfunction, TEE gave the diagnosis in 12 and TTE gave it in eight patients (p = NS).  Both methods gave a conclusive diagnosis in 13 out of 13 cases of mitral stenosis (p = NS).  Also, TEE provided a conclusive diagnosis in eight of eight patients with adult congenital heart disease and TTE gave this information in four (p = NS).
Left ventricular mass regression after aortic valve replacement measured by ultrafast computed tomography.  Left ventricular mass and function were measured using ultrafast computed tomography, and were correlated with clinical status in 17 patients with aortic stenosis and/or insufficiency undergoing aortic valve replacement or balloon valvuloplasty.  Wall mass was 159 +/- 38 gm/m2 initially, decreased 25% to 116 +/- 29 gm/m2 at 4 month (p less than 0.001), and decreased a total of 34% to 105 +/- 33 gm/m2 at 8 months after valve repair.  By 8 months not only was the mean wall mass within the normal range, but only three patients retained abnormal hypertrophy.  Ejection fraction increased 8% (p = 0.06).  Clinical function improved in all patients, with only three patients remaining outside of New York Heart Association functional class 1 at 8 months.  Regression of ventricular mass into the normal range correlated with attainment of class 1 functional status (p less than 0.02), despite a lack of increase of ejection fraction.  The single patient followed for 8 months after valvuloplasty had minor wall mass regression and minor clinical improvement.
Hypertensive heart disease: relationship of silent ischemia to coronary artery disease and left ventricular hypertrophy.  ECG evidence of silent ischemia occurs commonly in patients with systemic hypertension, but its relationship to left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), large-vessel coronary artery disease (CAD), and neurohumoral factors remains unclear.  Accordingly we validated the results of the echocardiographic method used to measure left ventricular (LV) mass in the Soviet Union by comparison with necropsy measurements in 30 patients, and we examined the relationships in 46 men with essential hypertension among ST segment depression during ambulatory monitoring, exercise stress and transesophageal pacing (n = 38), and LV mass, catheterization evidence of CAD (n = 25), and neurohumoral factors (plasma catecholamines and platelet aggregability).  Echocardiographic measurements of LV mass by both the Soviet and Penn methods were closely correlated with necropsy values (r = 0.78 and 90, respectively; both p less than 0.001).  During ambulatory monitoring from 1 to 17 episodes of greater than or equal to 1 mm ST depression occurred in 26 of 46 (65%) patients with hypertension; ischemia was also provoked by exercise or pacing stress in most but not all of these patients (65% and 80%, respectively).  Neither ST depression nor the occurrence of additional episodes of symptomatic angina was related to the presence of coronary obstruction at catheterization; patients with and without ST depression did not differ in age, blood pressure, or LV mass.
Parental history is an independent risk factor for coronary artery disease: the Framingham Study.  Family history of CAD, defined as parental death by CAD, was found to be a significant independent predictor of CAD in a logistic regression model controlling for standard risk factors and length of follow-up among the 5209 participants in the Framingham Study.  Persons with a positive parental history have a 29% increased risk of CAD, and the strength of the association between parental history and CAD is similar to that found for other standard risk factors such as systolic blood pressure, cholesterol level, and cigarette smoking.  No evidence was found that persons with a family history of CAD have a decreased capacity to cope with the deleterious effects of known risk factors; that is, no significant interaction was found between any of the risk factors and parental history of CAD.  Among men with low risk for CAD by risk-factor profile (i.e., nonsmoking, thin, nonhypertensive persons), more than two thirds of those who experience CAD have a positive parental history.  This study suggests that CAD among persons who are predicted to be at low risk by standard risk factors may have a substantial genetic component and that the risk associated with parental history may not be reduced by modification of these factors.  Nevertheless, among persons with a positive family history, those with a favorable risk profile are at substantially less risk for CAD than those with an unfavorable risk profile.
Effect of verapamil on mortality and major events after acute myocardial infarction (the Danish Verapamil Infarction Trial II--DAVIT II)   The effect of verapamil on death and major events (i.e., death or reinfarction) after an acute myocardial infarction was studied in a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled multicenter trial.  Eight hundred seventy-eight patients started treatment with verapamil, 360 mg/day, and 897 patients with placebo.  Treatment started in the second week after admission and continued for up to 18 months (mean 16 months).  Ninety-five deaths and 146 major events occurred in the verapamil group and 119 deaths and 180 major events in the placebo group.  The 18-month mortality rates were 11.1 and 13.8% (p = 0.11, hazard ratio, 0.80; 95% confidence limits, 0.61 to 1.05), and major event rates 18.0 and 21.6% (p = 0.03, hazard ratio, 0.80; 95% confidence limits, 0.64 to 0.99) in the verapamil and placebo groups, respectively.  In patients without heart failure in the coronary care unit the mortality rates were 7.7% in the verapamil group and 11.8% in the placebo group (p = 0.02, hazard ratio, 0.64; 95% confidence limits, 0.44 to 0.94), and major event rates 14.6 and 19.7% (p = 0.01, hazard ratio 0.70; 95% confidence limits (0.52 to 0.93).  In patients with heart failure the mortality rates were 17.9 and 17.5% (p = 0.79, hazard ratio, 1.05; 95% confidence limits, 0.72 to 1.54), and major event rates 24.9 and 24.9% (p = 1.0, hazard ratio 0.98; 95% confidence limits 0.72 to 1.39).  Long-term treatment with verapamil after an acute myocardial infarction caused a significant reduction in major events, and the positive effect was found in patients without heart failure.
Impact of field-transmitted electrocardiography on time to in-hospital thrombolytic therapy in acute myocardial infarction.  To assess the impact of a field-transmitted electrocardiogram (ECG) on patients with possible acute myocardial infarction, randomized and open trials were performed with a portable electrocardiographic system coupled with a cellular phone programmed to automatically transmit ECGs to the base hospital.  Consecutive patients served by the 6 units of the Salt Lake City Emergency Rescue System were studied; 71 patients were randomized to in-field ECG (n = 34) versus no ECG (n = 37).  Time on scene was 16.4 +/- 9.7 minutes for the ECG group versus 16.1 +/- 7.0 minutes for the non ECG group (difference not significant).  Time of transport averaged 18.2 +/- 9.9 and 17.6 +/- 13.1 minutes, respectively (difference not significant).  Six of 34 patients with in-field ECG showed acute myocardial infarction, qualified for and received thrombolytic therapy at 48 +/- 12 minutes after hospital arrival (range 30 to 60) compared with 103 +/- 44 minutes (p less than 0.01) for 51 historical control patients and 68 +/- 29 minutes for 6 concurrent control patients without in-field ECG.  Thus, in-field ECG causes negligible delays in paramedic time, leads to significant decreases in time to in-hospital thrombolysis and may make in-field therapy feasible.  In-field ECG may be an important addition to reperfusion strategies.
Sensitivity of a set of myocardial infarction screening criteria in patients with anatomically documented single and multiple infarcts.  A subset of 3 screening criteria (Q wave greater than or equal to 30 ms in lead aVF, any Q or R wave less than or equal to 10 ms and less than or equal to 0.1 mV in lead V2, and R wave greater than or equal to 40 ms in V1) has been proposed to identify single nonacute myocardial infarcts.  Cumulatively, these 3 criteria achieved 95% specificity, and 84 and 77% sensitivities for inferior and anterior myocardial infarcts, respectively, among patients identified by coronary angiography and left ventriculography.  This study establishes the true sensitivities of the set of screening criteria in 71 patients with anatomically proven single myocardial infarcts and 32 patients with multiple myocardial infarcts.  In the single inferior infarct group, the aVF criterion was 90% sensitive.  The V2 criterion (any Q or R wave less than or equal to 10 ms and less than or equal to 0.1 mV) was 67% sensitive in the single anterior infarct group.  No single criterion proved sensitive in identifying a posterolateral infarct.  The set of screening criteria performed just as well for multiple infarcts as it did for single infarcts, with a cumulative sensitivity of 72%.  The overall sensitivity of the screening set in the 103 patients in all groups was 71%.
Two-year outcome after angiographically documented myocardial reperfusion for acute coronary occlusion. Thrombolysis and Angioplasty Study Group.  Reperfusion therapy has been clearly shown to decrease the early mortality after acute myocardial infarction, but the impact of this therapy on long-term survival has been less extensively evaluated.  This study reports the extended follow-up of a large cohort of 810 patients treated with intravenous thrombolytic therapy combined, when considered necessary to maintain or augment infarct vessel patency, with mechanical reperfusion therapies.  Each patient underwent coronary angiography within 2 hours of the initiation of the thrombolytic infusion.  Coronary angioplasty was performed in 62% of the patients before hospital discharge and 21% underwent coronary artery bypass graft surgery.  Follow-up was obtained in 96% to a mean of 18.8 months (range, 1.5 to 48 months).  All-cause mortality over this period was 3.3%; 2.1% died from cardiac causes.  Nonfatal reinfarction occurred in 5.1%.  Although the low event rate limits the validity of statistical comparisons, the patients who survived the follow-up period tended to be younger (56 +/- 10 vs 65 +/- 7 years), to have better predischarge left ventricular function (left ventricular ejection fraction, 52 +/- 11 vs 46 +/- 13%) and to have a lower prevalence of multivessel coronary artery disease (45 vs 67%).  This excellent long-term survival may, in part, reflect the exclusion of high-risk patients from enrollment in the Thrombolysis and Angioplasty in Myocardial Infarction (TAMI) studies.  It may also be attributable, however, to the frequent use of combined thrombolysis and mechanical revascularization in this population.
Functional significance of myocardial perfusion defects induced by dipyridamole using thallium-201 single-photon emission computed tomography and two-dimensional echocardiography.  The mechanisms responsible for inhomogeneous myocardial blood flow after oral administration of a large dose (300 mg) of dipyridamole were assessed in 27 patients with serial thallium-201 single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and simultaneous 2-dimensional echocardiograms.  Myocardial tomographic images were obtained 50 minutes and 3 to 4 hours after administration of dipyridamole.  Two-dimensional echocardiograms were recorded at baseline and then every 15 minutes for 60 minutes.  Dipyridamole caused only a mild reduction in blood pressure (from 129 +/- 18 to 126 +/- 16 mm Hg) and a mild increase in heart rate (from 69 +/- 15 to 73 +/- 4 beats/min).  Sixteen patients had perfusion defects after dipyridamole by SPECT, which underwent partial or total filling-in.  Fourteen of these patients (87.5%) had either a new abnormality or further deterioration of a preexisting wall motion abnormality by 2-dimensional echocardiography, and thus were considered to have developed transient ischemia during dipyridamole administration.  Ten of 11 patients (91%) with normal perfusion or fixed defects by SPECT had no further deterioration in wall motion after oral dipyridamole, and were thus considered to have no evidence of myocardial ischemia.  In conclusion, most patients with transient thallium-201 defects after dipyridamole develop transient worsening of resting wall motion by 2-dimensional echocardiography, suggestive of true myocardial ischemia.  Because myocardial oxygen demand, as indicated by the heart rate-blood pressure product, did not change significantly, the mechanism of myocardial ischemia in these patients is likely to be diminished regional blood flow related to a "subendocardial steal" induced by dipyridamole.
Left ventricular dilatation and pulmonary thallium uptake after single-photon emission computer tomography using thallium-201 during adenosine-induced coronary hyperemia.  This study examined the implications of left ventricular (LV) dilatation and increased pulmonary thallium uptake during adenosine-induced coronary hyperemia.  The lung-to-heart thallium ratio in the initial images was significantly higher in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) than normal subjects; 0.48 +/- 0.16 in 3-vessel disease (n = 16), 0.43 +/- 0.10 in 2-vessel disease (n = 20), 0.43 +/- 0.08 in 1-vessel disease (n = 16) and 0.36 +/- 0.05 in normal subjects (n = 7) (p less than 0.001, 0.09 and 0.06, respectively).  There was a significant correlation between the severity and the extent of the perfusion abnormality (determined from the polar maps) and the lung-to-heart thallium ratio (r = 0.51 and 0.52, respectively, p less than 0.0002).  There was also a significant correlation between lung thallium washout and lung-to-heart thallium ratio (r = 0.42, p = 0.0009) and peak heart rate (r = -0.49, p less than 0.0001).  The LV dilatation was mostly due to an increase in cavity dimension (30% increase) and to a lesser extent (6% increase) due to increase in LV size.  (The cavity dimensions were measured from the short-axis slices at the midventricular level in the initial and delayed images).  The dilation was seen in patients with CAD but not in the normal subjects.  These changes correlated with the extent and severity of the thallium perfusion abnormality.  Thus, adenosine-induced coronary hyperemia may cause LV dilation and increased lung thallium uptake on the basis of subendocardial ischemia.
Effects of bepridil and diltiazem on ventricular repolarization in angina pectoris.  To examine the time-course and potential predictors of prolongation of ventricular repolarization with the calcium antagonist bepridil, the effects of bepridil (300 to 500 mg/day; n = 45) and diltiazem (180 to 300 mg/day; n = 42) on QT and QTc interval duration were analyzed in a randomized double-blind study in patients with angina pectoris.  Electrocardiograms were recorded before and 14, 28, 70 and 112 days after treatment was begun.  After 14 days, bepridil prolonged QT interval by 26 +/- 35 ms (range, -60 to 120 ms) and QTc (Bazett's formula) by 17 +/- 33 ms (range, -73 to 107 ms) compared to baseline (both p less than 0.05).  QT or QTc did not significantly increase thereafter.  However, among the 30 patients who had less than 40 ms QTc prolongation at day 14 compared with baseline, 13 (43%) exceeded this limit on at least 1 of the following visits.  Diltiazem did not significantly alter QT or QTc intervals.  The absolute change in QTc interval from baseline observed after 14 days of bepridil therapy was inversely proportional to the baseline QTc interval (r = -0.68; n = 42; p less than 0.001).  The degree of bepridil-induced QTc prolongation on day 14 correlated with pretreatment RR interval (r = 0.36; n = 42; p less than 0.02).  In conclusion, chronic administration of bepridil but not of diltiazem prolongs ventricular repolarization in patients with angina pectoris.  The overall effects of bepridil therapy on QT and QTc intervals can be assessed by an electrocardiogram recorded after 14 days of treatment but subsequent measurements may be required in individual patients.  A short baseline QTc interval and a slow initial heart rate may be potentially useful predictors of a greater QTc prolongation with bepridil.
Effects of intravenous verapamil on left ventricular relaxation and filling in stable angina pectoris.  Left ventricular (LV) diastolic function is often impaired in coronary artery disease (CAD).  To assess whether verapamil could improve LV diastolic properties, 12 patients with CAD undergoing right- and left-sided cardiac catheterization, as well as simultaneous radionuclide angiography, were studied before and during intravenous administration of verapamil (0.1 mg/kg as a bolus followed by 0.007 mg/kg/min).  The heart rate was kept constant by atrial pacing in both studies.  LV pressure-volume relations were obtained.  Verapamil decreased LV systolic pressure (130 +/- 22 to 117 +/- 16 mm Hg, p less than 0.01) and the end-systolic pressure/volume ratio (2.4 +/- 1.3 to 1.6 +/- 0.5 mm Hg/ml, p less than 0.05), and increased LV end-diastolic (13 +/- 4 to 16 +/- 4 mm Hg, p less than 0.02) and pulmonary capillary pressures (10 +/- 5 to 12 +/- 5 mm Hg, p less than 0.005).  Despite such negative inotropic effects, cardiac index increased (3.4 +/- 0.7 to 3.9 +/- 0.6 liters/min/m2, p less than 0.02).  The time constant of isovolumic relaxation shortened (63 +/- 14 to 47 +/- 9 ms, p less than 0.02); peak filling rate increased (370 +/- 155 to 519 +/- 184 ml/s, p less than 0.001; 2.6 +/- 1.1 to 3.3 +/- 0.9 end-diastolic counts/s, p less than 0.02; and 4.1 +/- 1.6 to 5.5 +/- 1.5 stroke counts/s, p less than 0.001).
Long-term follow-up in patients with incessant ventricular tachycardia.  Seventeen patients with coronary artery disease, idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy or no organic heart disease who presented with incessant ventricular tachycardia (VT) were studied and followed for a mean period of 51 +/- 35 months.  In these patients the incessant VT included greater than or equal to 3 episodes of sustained VT at a rate of greater than or equal to 120 beats/min and frequent episodes of nonsustained VT over a 24-hour period.  No patient had electrolyte disorder, prolonged QT interval, drug-induced arrhythmia or myocardial infarction less than 2 weeks old.  Six patients died within 27 months of follow-up; 4 from sudden death and 2 from acute myocardial infarction.  Three of the 11 surviving patients had remission of their VT within 1 week after the diagnosis of incessant VT.  In 3 other patients in whom antiarrhythmic drugs were discontinued during follow-up because of adverse effects of the drugs or other medical reasons, 2 were found in remission.  In the remaining 5 alive patients, deliberate attempts were made to discontinue the antiarrhythmic drugs; 4 of these patients were found in remission when the drugs were discontinued.  Thus, 9 of these patients (53%) with incessant VT had remission over a mean follow-up of 55 +/- 34 months after discontinuation of the antiarrhythmic drugs.  The probability of remission in patients surviving incessant VT warrants trials of discontinuation of antiarrhythmic drugs in these patients.
Mechanisms in heart failure and the role of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition.  The four major diagnostic criteria for the syndrome of congestive heart failure are left ventricular dysfunction, exercise intolerance, pulmonary congestion or edema and ventricular arrhythmias.  Activation of norepinephrine, angiotensin II, vasopressin and atrial natriuretic peptide may be a key factor in the vasoconstriction and increased impedance to left ventricular ejection in heart failure.  Interventions that interfere with these vasoconstrictor mechanisms should have a salutary effect on left ventricular performance.  Treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, alpha-adrenoceptor blockers and vasopressin antagonists has resulted in hemodynamic benefits, but it has been more difficult to demonstrate long-term clinical effectiveness.  Reductions in mortality have been demonstrated in patients with heart failure treated with vasodilators and ACE inhibitors.  Improvement in the quality of life and prolongation of life are the only two appropriate goals in the management of heart failure.  Further understanding of the role of angiotensin II and its interference by ACE inhibition in the tissue processes of heart failure is needed.
Potential role of the tissue renin-angiotensin system in the pathophysiology of congestive heart failure.  The circulating renin-angiotensin system (RAS) plays an important role in the maintenance of cardiovascular homeostasis.  It has recently been demonstrated that endogenous RAS exist in target tissues that are important in cardiovascular regulation.  This article reviews the multiple effects of angiotensin II in target tissues, the evidence for the presence of functional tissue RAS and the data that suggest a role for these tissue RAS in the pathophysiology of heart failure.  Activation of circulating neurohormones is predictive of worsened survival in heart failure; however, cardiac and renal tissue RAS activities are also increased in the compensated stage of heart failure, when plasma renin-angiotensin activity is normal.  It is hypothesized that the plasma RAS maintains circulatory homeostasis during acute cardiac decompensation, while changes in tissue RAS contribute to homeostatic responses during chronic sustained cardiac impairment.  This concept of different functions of circulating and tissue RAS in the pathophysiology of heart failure may have important pharmacologic implications.
Neuroendocrine activity in congestive heart failure.  The increased neuroendocrine activity in patients with congestive heart failure appears to be a generalized attempt to maintain blood pressure at the expense of reduced cardiac performance and salt and water retention.  It is likely that baroreceptor dysfunction contributes to increased sympathetic nervous system activity in patients with congestive heart failure.  The usual tonic inhibitory messages emanating from baro- and mechanoreceptors in the great vessels and heart fail to adjust sympathetic traffic from the brain to the periphery, leading to uninhibited sympathetic tone.  Arginine vasopressin and plasma renin activity may be increased secondarily; however, plasma renin activity activation could also be induced by a low-salt diet and diuretic use.  Preliminary baseline data indicate that patients with left ventricular dysfunction (ejection fraction less than or equal to 35%) but no or very mild symptoms of heart failure have increased plasma levels of norepinephrine, atrial natriuretic factor and arginine vasopressin, while plasma renin activity is normal, suggesting that neuroendocrine activity contributes to the pathogenesis of congestive heart failure.  Neurohormones such as angiotensin II may alter gene expression, leading to changes in the shape and size of the cell.  Remodeling of the heart and blood vessels is associated with both heart failure and hypertension.  Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors have been demonstrated to retard or reverse the remodeling process under certain experimental conditions.  Studies are currently under way to test this possibility in patients.
Effects of enalapril and neuroendocrine activation on prognosis in severe congestive heart failure (follow-up of the CONSENSUS trial). CONSENSUS Trial Study Group.  This study enrolled 253 patients with severe heart failure (New York Heart Association functional class IV) from 35 centers in Scandinavia, randomly assigned to treatment with placebo or enalapril, in addition to their usual treatment for heart failure.  After an initial titration period, the daily doses of enalapril ranged from 2.5 to 40 mg.  At the end of the trial, 46% of the placebo-treated patients and 61% of the enalapril-treated patients were alive (p = 0.003); the survival figures at 8 months after completion of the trial were 32 and 48%, respectively (p = 0.001); and 21 and 30%, respectively (p = 0.006) at the 2-year follow-up.  In the placebo group, there was a significant positive association between mortality and baseline levels of norepinephrine, epinephrine, angiotensin II, aldosterone and atrial natriuretic peptide; no such association was found in the enalapril-treated patients.  The results suggest that the effects of enalapril on mortality are related to a counteraction of the neuroendocrine activation in general and to the renin-angiotensin system in particular.
Pharmacology of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors as a guide to their use in congestive heart failure.  The pharmacokinetics of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are difficult to assess for several reasons.  First, these compounds exert their influence by inhibiting an intermediary enzyme of a cascade of enzymatic events, whose rate-limiting enzyme (renin) is not directly affected by ACE inhibition.  Second, renin and angiotensin I accumulate during ACE inhibition and a change in the dose of an ACE inhibitor could produce sudden shifts of angiotensin I to angiotensin II.  Third, components of the circulating renin system require the interaction of several organ systems and effector sites.  Fourth, the kinetics of ACE inhibitors can be influenced by the organ systems responsible for drug absorption, metabolism and excretion, and the functional status of these systems can be affected by the heart failure process.  Fifth, at least some portion of the cardiovascular effects of ACE inhibitors is influenced by the contributions of other systems whose physiologic effects may be of importance in some patients with congestive heart failure.  Sixth, the potential impact of tissue-bound ACE is not yet fully understood.  Finally, for appropriate drug dosing, the effects of aging on the heart failure process, the extent of renin system activity, and the disposition of ACE inhibitors need to be considered.  Because of their complex pharmacokinetics, treatment with ACE inhibitors has been guided by their pharmacodynamic and clinical characteristics.
Clinical and hemodynamic assessment of the hepatojugular reflux.  The hepatojugular reflux (HJR) test was studied to assess the ability to clinically predict response during cardiac catheterization and to determine its significance in patients without heart failure and correlate it to their baseline hemodynamic parameters.  Sixty-five patients considered to be free of heart failure undergoing routine cardiac catheterization were enrolled.  The HJR test, defined as the venous pressure response to sustained abdominal compression, was performed in a standardized manner at the bedside assessing change in internal jugular venous pressure and during right-sided cardiac catheterization measuring change in right atrial pressure.  For comparison a sustained increase greater than or equal to 1 cm was considered positive.  In 62 of 65 patients the HJR test stabilized by 15 seconds.  The results during examination at the bedside agreed with those at catheterization (K = 0.74, p less than 0.001).  The HJR test result correlated best with baseline mean right atrial pressure (r = 0.59) and right ventricular end-diastolic pressure (r = 0.51), and in bivariate regression analysis predicted right atrial (F(1,63) = 32.8, R2 = 0.34, p less than 0.0001) and right ventricular end-diastolic (F(1,63) = 22, R2 = 0.26, p less than 0.0001) pressures.  A positive test had high sensitivity and specificity for predicting right atrial pressure greater than 9 mm Hg (1.0, 0.85) and right ventricular end-diastolic pressure greater than 12 mm Hg (0.90, 0.89).  It is concluded that 15 seconds is adequate for interpretation, and bedside observation predicts the response during right-sided cardiac catheterization.
Anatomic correlations of the long-axis views in biplane transesophageal echocardiography.  The number of views obtainable during transesophageal echocardiography (TE) has been limited by the fixed position of the transducer at the end of the probe.  This has confined standard TE studies to short-axis tomography of the heart and aorta.  Recently, a biplane TE probe has become available that is capable of both long- and short-axis imaging.  This study prospectively assessed the application of the long-axis plane of the biplane probe in providing complementary long-axis views in ambulatory patients.  Six standard long-axis views could be obtained and were compared with corresponding anatomic sections to illustrate anatomic relations and facilitate structure identification.  The long-axis views provide a better appreciation of the 3-dimensional nature of cardiac anatomy and function, especially in demonstrating the relation of vertically aligned structures.
Transient left ventricular filling abnormalities (diastolic stunning) after acute myocardial infarction.  A variety of experimental studies suggest that diastolic left ventricular (LV) function changes after acute myocardial infarction (AMI), but limited data exist on these changes in humans.  To assess diastolic filling after AMI, 60 patients underwent Doppler echocardiographic examination within 24 hours of AMI.  Of 54 patients who also underwent catheterization, 45 (83%) were successfully reperfused.  A subgroup of 17 patients underwent a follow-up Doppler examination at 7 days after infarction, whereas 15 patients with stable exertional angina served as control subjects.  There was no significant difference in age, gender, incidence of systemic hypertension or diabetes mellitus, heart rate, mean arterial pressure or severity of coronary artery disease between the infarct and control groups.  The infarct group had a lower velocity time integral total (9.9 +/- 0.4 cm vs 12.0 +/- 0.9 cm, p less than 0.001), a lower velocity time integral E (5.8 +/- 0.3 cm vs 6.8 +/- 0.5 cm, p less than 0.01) and a lower velocity time integral 0.333 (3.5 +/- 0.4 cm vs 6.1 +/- 0.5 cm, p less than 0.01) than the control group.  In addition, velocity time integral A/total was significantly greater in the infarction group (0.44 +/- 0.03 vs 0.35 +/- 0.04, p less than 0.01) compared to the control group.  The follow-up subgroup showed an increase in velocity time integral total (p less than 0.01), velocity time integral E (p less than 0.05) and velocity time integral 0.333/total (p less than 0.05) over the first 7 days after infarction.  The final recovery values at 7 days were not significantly different from those of the coronary artery disease group.
Functional status after coronary artery bypass grafting and percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty.  Two cohorts of consecutive patients of comparable age with similar preprocedure cardiac function who underwent either coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG; n = 106) or percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA; n = 64) were entered into a prospective comparison study examining functional status and return to work during the first year of recovery.  Patients were evaluated using standardized functional status instruments for activities of daily living, work performance, social activity, mental health and quality of social interaction at 1, 6 and 12 months after the procedure.  Within the CABG group, statistically significant improvements of functional status on every subscale were noted over the 1-year follow-up.  Patients undergoing PTCA demonstrated significant improvement in all dimensions except for the quality of interaction at 1 year as compared with baseline.  When the 2 groups were compared, the PTCA group demonstrated greater participation than the CABG group in routine daily physical and social activities at 1 and 6 months, but this apparent advantage disappeared by 1 year.  Measures of psychological functioning were better after CABG than after PTCA.  A reduction in the number of those with employment occurred in both the CABG and PTCA groups, independent of physical functional status measures, which improved in both groups after the procedures.  For those with employment, the CABG group reported the greatest improvement in work performance.
Early postoperative balloon coronary angioplasty for failed coronary artery bypass grafting.  In a small number of patients, coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) fails to relieve anginal symptoms.  The usefulness of coronary angioplasty for the treatment of early (less than or equal to 90 days) recurrent ischemia after CABG was examined.  Forty-five patients were treated from 2 to 90 days after CABG, including 8 patients studied emergently for prolonged ischemic symptoms.  One-, 2- and 3-vessel native disease was found in 4, 10 and 31 patients, respectively.  At the time of postoperative angiography, the major anatomic mechanism of recurrent ischemia was complete vein graft occlusion in 12 patients (27%), internal mammary artery occlusion in 3 (7%), vein graft stenoses in 13 (29%), internal mammary artery stenoses in 10 (22%), unbypassed disease in 4 (8%) and disease distal to the graft insertion site in 3 (7%).  Angioplasty was successful at 91 of 98 sites (93%), including 95% of 41 lesions in native arteries, 89% of 46 lesions in vein grafts and 100% of 11 internal mammary artery lesions attempted.  Complete revascularization was achieved in 84% of patients.  There were 2 in-hospital deaths and 2 myocardial infarctions.  Two additional patients underwent repeat CABG before discharge after uncomplicated but unsuccessful angioplasty.  At late follow-up of the 43 survivors (mean 44 months), there were 4 deaths, 2 of which were noncardiac.  Repeat CABG was required in only 3 patients and repeat angioplasty was performed in 10.  Angina was absent or minimal in 35 patients; 17 patients were employed full time.  Thus, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty can relieve myocardial ischemia after unsuccessful CABG in the majority of patients.
Comparison of the antihypertensive efficiency of nitrendipine, metoprolol, mepindolol and enalapril using ambulatory 24-hour blood pressure monitoring.  In a randomized 6-month study of 201 patients, the antihypertensive efficiency of the calcium antagonist nitrendipine, the beta 1-selective blocker metoprolol, mepindolol, the beta blocker with intrinsic activity and the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor enalapril were compared as monitored by 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure (BP) measurements.  The study was designed so that a comparable decrease in casual BP values was obtained with all 4 drugs.  If normotension was not achieved with monotherapy, a diuretic also was administered.  Pretreatment casual BP and mean 24-hour ambulatory BP values did not differ between the 4 groups.  Normotension as assessed by casual BP measurements was observed in all 4 groups after 6 months of therapy, there being no significant differences between the groups.  However, significantly more diuretics were required in the mepindolol (n = 14) and in the enalapril (n = 20) groups compared to the nitrendipine (n = 5) and metoprolol (n = 7) groups.  Despite comparable casual BP control, the 4 groups differed significantly in their mean 24-hour measurements.  The greatest systolic and diastolic BP decreases were seen in the metoprolol group.  Metoprolol was also the most effective drug in decreasing the frequency of systolic pressure peaks greater than 180 mm Hg.  Both beta blockers and enalapril significantly decreased the morning BP increase compared to the values before treatment, while nitrendipine did not.  These data show that casual BP measurement is not a good predictor of 24-hour BP in patients taking hypertensive therapy.  Despite an equal degree of "office" BP control, different antihypertensive regimens do not confer the same degree of "nonoffice" BP control.
Usefulness of verapamil for congestive heart failure associated with abnormal left ventricular diastolic filling and normal left ventricular systolic performance.  Normal left ventricular systolic performance with impaired left ventricular diastolic filling may be present in a substantial number of patients with congestive heart failure (CHF).  To evaluate the effect of oral verapamil in this subset, 20 men (mean age 68 +/- 5 years) with CHF, intact left ventricular function (ejection fraction greater than 45%) and abnormal diastolic filling (peak filling rate less than 2.5 end-diastolic volumes per second [edv/s]) were studied in a placebo-controlled, double-blind 5-week crossover trial.  All patients underwent echocardiography to rule out significant valvular disease, and thallium-201 stress scintigraphy to exclude major active ischemia.  Compared to baseline values, verapamil significantly improved exercise capacity by 33% (13.9 +/- 4.3 vs 10.7 +/- 3.4 minutes at baseline) and peak filling rate by 30% (2.29 +/- 0.54 vs 1.85 +/- 0.45 edv/s at baseline) (all p less than 0.05).  Placebo values were 12.3 +/- 4.0 minutes and 2.16 +/- 0.48 edv/s, respectively (difference not significant for both).  Improvement from baseline in an objective clinico-radiographic heart failure score (scale 0 to 13) was significantly greater with verapamil compared to placebo (median improvement in score: 3 vs 1, p less than 0.01).  Mean ejection fraction and systolic blood pressure were unchanged from baseline; diastolic blood pressure and heart rate decreased to a small degree.  Verapamil may have therapeutic efficacy in patients with CHF, preserved systolic function and impaired diastolic filling.
Detection and location of myocardial infarction using technetium-99m sestamibi imaging at rest.  Technetium-99m (Tc-99m) sestamibi imaging at rest has been used to detect and localize myocardial infarction.  The largest study to date is a cooperative study of 146 patients in 17 institutions.  There were 24 normal subjects and 122 patients with documented myocardial infarction based on clinical, enzymatic or electrocardiographic criteria.  The presence of segmental myocardial perfusion defects was compared to the presence of a Q wave on the electrocardiogram or wall motion abnormality on gated blood pool scans, performed within 48 hours of the Tc-99m sestamibi study.  Of the 122 infarct patients, 118 (97%) showed perfusion abnormalities by Tc-99m sestamibi imaging.  A perfusion defect was found in 110 (99%) of 111 patients with a Q wave and a wall motion abnormality, 113 (99%) of 114 patients with a wall motion abnormality and 113 (98%) of 115 patients with a Q wave.  Of the 24 normal subjects, 22 (92%) had normal Tc-99m sestamibi images.  In 75% of 1,986 segments, both a Tc-99m sestamibi defect and a regional wall motion abnormality on gated blood scans were present.  In 11% of segments, wall motion was normal but Tc-99m sestamibi imaging was abnormal; in 14% of segments, wall motion was abnormal and Tc-99m sestamibi images were normal.  In the 24 control subjects, 99% of the segments were normal.  Thirty-eight patients had coronary angiography.  A close relation existed between the coronary anatomy and myocardial Tc-99m sestamibi uptake.  All 9 territories supplied by an occluded vessel and poor collaterals had grade 0 uptake (scale 0 to 2: 0 = markedly reduced; 2 = normal).
Detection and assessment of unstable angina using myocardial perfusion imaging: comparison between technetium-99m sestamibi SPECT and 12-lead electrocardiogram.  Forty-five studies using technetium-99m (Tc-99m) sestamibi single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) were performed on patients hospitalized for spontaneous chest pain suggestive of myocardial ischemia.  The studies were done after an injection during an episode of chest pain and a repeated injection when the patients were free of pain.  All patients were hospitalized with a presumed diagnosis of unstable angina, and none had evidence of a previous myocardial infarction.  The presence of a perfusion defect observed with Tc-99m sestamibi injected during chest pain had a 96% sensitivity and a 79% specificity for the detection of significant coronary artery disease (stenosis greater than or equal to 50%) on subsequent angiography.  When the criterion of a larger perfusion defect during pain compared to absence of pain was used, the sensitivity was 81% and the specificity was 84%.  In contrast, transient electrocardiographic ischemic changes during pain had a sensitivity of 35% and a specificity of 68%; electrocardiographic changes during or outside episodes of chest pain had a sensitivity of 65% and a specificity of 63% for the diagnosis.  Tc-99m sestamibi SPECT represents a reliable noninvasive diagnostic tool that could aid in the diagnosis of myocardial ischemia in patients with spontaneous chest pain and provide additional information to that provided by the electrocardiogram.
Planar imaging techniques used with technetium-99m sestamibi to evaluate chronic myocardial ischemia.  The results of published and some unpublished studies comparing planar imaging performed with 2 radionuclides, thallium-201 (T1-201) and technetium-99m (Tc-99m) sestamibi, are reviewed.  The average sensitivity for the detection of coronary artery disease (CAD) in studies involving 594 patients was 85% (range 73 to 96%).  The average sensitivity for individual vessels was 65% (range 60 to 70%).  The average segmental concordance between T1-201 and Tc-99m sestamibi was 89%.  End-diastolic gated perfusion images improved the concordance between Tc-99m sestamibi and angiography in 22 patients from 83.4 to 87%.  Semiquantitative analysis increased the concordance between T1-201 and Tc-99m sestamibi from 89 to 91%.  Ventricular function derived from gated Tc-99m sestamibi perfusion images showed a significant correlation with echocardiography (n = 62, r = 0.85); with angiography (n = 70, r = 0.91); and with equilibrium radionuclide ventriculography (n = 18, r = 0.86).  The ratio of lung to left ventricle uptake and the ratio of right ventricle to left ventricle uptake was assessed.  Eight of 52 patients had an abnormally elevated lung index (greater than 42%) and these patients had the most severe CAD.  Six of the 52 patients had an abnormally elevated right ventricular index (greater than 56%) and these patients had more severe CAD.
Experimental studies of the physiologic properties of technetium-99m isonitriles.  Recently, efforts have been directed at the development of technetium-99m (Tc-99m)-labeled isonitrile compounds for assessment of regional perfusion and viability after experimental myocardial infarction or ischemia.  One of the most promising of these agents, Tc-99m sestamibi, has undergone rather extensive laboratory investigation.  Like thallium-201 (Tl-201), the uptake of Tc-99m sestamibi in myocardial tissue is proportional to myocardial blood flow after intravenous injection.  Similar to other diffusible indicators, Tc-99m sestamibi underestimates blood flow at high flow rates.  In low flow regions, the myocardial uptake of this agent is higher relative to nonischemic uptake than is microsphere-determined blood flow.  This is attributed to increased extraction at low flows.  This first-pass myocardial extraction fraction for Tc-99m sestamibi is less than that for Tl-201.  However, Tc-99m sestamibi has a higher parenchymal cell permeability and higher volume of distribution than T;-201.  Tc-99m sestamibi shows minimal "delayed redistribution" after initial intravenous administration.  Uptake of Tc-99m sestamibi is not altered by myocardial "stunning" or with ischemic dysfunction produced by sustained low coronary flow.  The uptake of the isonitrile is still proportional to blood flow in these situations.  In intact animal models, myocardial uptake of Tc-99m sestamibi during coronary occlusion delineates the in vivo area at risk.  When Tc-99m sestamibi is administered after reperfusion following variable periods of preceding coronary occlusion, Tc-99m sestamibi uptake delineates the area of viable myocardium that is salvaged and not simply the degree of reflow.  This suggests that serial Tc-99m sestamibi imaging might be useful in assessing the efficacy of coronary reperfusion after thrombolytic therapy.
Myocardial perfusion imaging with technetium-99m sestamibi SPECT in the evaluation of coronary artery disease.  Technetium-99m (Tc-99m) sestamibi is a new myocardial perfusion imaging agent that offers significant advantages over thallium-201 (Tl-201) for myocardial perfusion imaging.  The results of the current clinical trials using acquisition and processing parameters similar to those for Tl-201 and a separate (2-day) injection protocol suggest that Tc-99m sestamibi and Tl-201 single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) provide similar information with respect to detection of myocardial perfusion defects, assessment of the pattern of defect reversibility, overall detection of coronary artery disease (CAD) and detection of disease in individual coronary arteries.  Tc-99m sestamibi SPECT appears to be superior to Tc-99m sestamibi planar imaging because the former provides a higher defect contrast and is more accurate for detection of disease in individual coronary arteries.  Research is currently under way addressing optimization of acquisition and processing of Tc-99m sestamibi studies and development of quantitative algorithms for detection and localization of CAD and sizing of transmural and nontransmural myocardial perfusion defects.  It is expected that with the implementation of the final results of these new developments, further significant improvement in image quality will be attained, which in turn will further increase the confidence in image interpretation.  Development of algorithms for analysis of end-diastolic myocardial images may allow better evaluation of small and nontransmural myocardial defects.  Furthermore, gated studies may provide valuable information with respect to regional myocardial wall motion and wall thickening.  With the implementation of algorithms for attenuation and scatter correction, the overall specificity of Tc-99m sestamibi SPECT should improve significantly because of a substantial decrease in the occurrence of attenuation-related image artifacts.
Clinical experience with technetium-99m teboroxime, a neutral, lipophilic myocardial perfusion imaging agent.  Technetium-99m (Tc-99m) teboroxime is a new technetium-based myocardial perfusion imaging agent (investigational code = SQ30217 [Cardiotec, Squibb Diagnostics]).  A member of a class of neutral, lipophilic, technetium-containing complexes known as boronic acid adducts of technetium dioxime (BATO) complexes, this agent is chemically very different from the cationic tracer thallium-201 (Tl-201) and from the cationic technetium complex Tc-99m sestamibi (Cardiolite, Du Pont Imaging Agents).  Tc-99m teboroxime has high myocardial extraction, rapid blood clearance, little lung uptake and rapid myocardial washout.  A biexponential pattern of myocardial washout is demonstrated in animals and in man.  Effective half-lives of the 2 washout components in man are 5.2 minutes and 3.8 hours and represent approximately 66 and 33% of the myocardial activity, respectively.  The first half-life for the myocardium is approximately 11 minutes.  As the agent washes out of the heart, hepatic uptake occurs, peaking at about 5 minutes after injection.  The liver is the major organ of excretion and receives, along with the large bowel, the largest radiation dose.  Rapid imaging protocols using standard cameras have achieved good myocardial counts from 3 planar views acquired over a 4- to 5-minute period or for single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) images acquired over a 10-minute period.  An entire stress/rest procedure can be completed in 1 hour.  Analysis of data from 155 patients from 4 centers using planar or SPECT imaging showed a sensitivity and specificity for blinded readings of 82 and 91%, respectively, when compared against overall clinical impression.
Simultaneous measurement of myocardial perfusion and ventricular function during exercise from a single injection of technetium-99m sestamibi in coronary artery disease.  New radiopharmaceuticals permit simultaneous assessment of myocardial perfusion and left ventricular function using a single tracer injection.  The purpose of this study was to quantitate the relation between myocardial perfusion and function at rest and during exercise in patients with documented coronary artery disease (CAD).  A rest first-pass radionuclide angiocardiogram (RNA) was recorded in 51 patients with CAD during injection of 10 mCi of technetium-99m (Tc-99m) sestamibi, and tomographic perfusion images were obtained 60 minutes later.  A treadmill test was then performed, and on attainment of an exercise end point a second first-pass RNA was recorded with 30 mCi of Tc-99m sestamibi.  Tomographic images reflecting myocardial perfusion during exercise were obtained 1 hour later.  Tomographic perfusion defect size, quantified using modifications of the Cedars-Sinai program, correlated directly with end-systolic volume and inversely with ejection fraction at rest and during exercise.  However, perfusion defect size often varied widely in patients with similar left ventricular function.  This independence between measurements of perfusion and function suggests that simultaneous assessment of the 2 physiologic variables could improve the diagnostic and prognostic information of radionuclide tests.
Comparison of SPECT using technetium-99m agents and thallium-201 and PET for the assessment of myocardial perfusion and viability.  This report reviews the applications of tomographic imaging with current and new tracers in assessing myocardial perfusion and viability.  Multiple studies with thallium-201 (TI-201) single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging for the detection of coronary artery disease (CAD) have demonstrated high sensitivity, high rates of normalcy and high reproducibility.  In assessing viability, fixed defects are frequently detected in viable zones in 4-hour studies with TI-201 imaging.  Redistribution imaging performed 18 to 72 hours after injection or reinjection of TI-201 before 4-hour redistribution imaging has been shown to improve accuracy of viability assessment.  TI-201 SPECT studies are limited by the suboptimal physical properties of TI-201, which result in variable image quality.  The 2 new technetium-99m (Tc-99m) - labeled myocardial perfusion tracers offer the ability to inject much higher amounts of radioactivity, making it possible to assess ventricular function as well as myocardial perfusion from the same injection of radiotracer.  Tc-99m sestamibi has very slow myocardial clearance, which allows for prolonged imaging time and results in image quality superior to that obtained with TI-201 and Tc-99m teboroxime.  The combination of minimal redistribution of Tc-99m sestamibi and high count rates makes gated SPECT imaging feasible, and also permits assessment of patients with acute ischemic syndromes by uncoupling the time of injection from the time of imaging.  The combination of high image quality and first-pass exercise capabilities may lead to a choice of this agent over TI-201 for assessment of chronic CAD.
Technetium-99m sestamibi myocardial imaging: same-day rest-stress studies and dipyridamole.  Unlike thallium-201, technetium-99m (Tc-99m) sestamibi does not redistribute in the myocardium after injection.  Thus, 2 separate injections, 1 at rest and the other at stress (or after dipyridamole), are required to differentiate ischemia from scar.  From a physical viewpoint, a 24-hour interval between the 2 injections is preferable for detection of coronary artery disease (CAD) with Tc-99m sestamibi imaging.  However, same-day studies are more convenient in clinical practice.  Results of studies using different Tc-99m sestamibi injection protocols are presented with emphasis on the advantages of a rest-stress injection sequence with a low dose at rest (7 mCi) followed 2 hours later by a higher dose at stress (25 mCi).  A prospective study was conducted in a patient population with proven CAD using same-day studies to compare a rest-stress (7 and 25 mCi, respectively) to a stress-rest (7 and 25 mCi) Tc-99m sestamibi injection sequence.  There was an agreement in 87.3% of the analyzed segments between the 2 protocols.  However, the largest discordance for type of defect applied to 7.4% of the segments judged ischemic in the rest-stress protocol, which were called scars on stress-rest.  This study showed that a rest-stress sequence is preferable when using a same-day protocol with a short time interval (less than 2 hours) between the 2 Tc-99m sestamibi injections because the rest image performed initially represents a "true" rest study, which is not necessarily the case with the stress-rest sequence.  Preliminary studies were performed to evaluate dipyridamole with Tc-99m sestamibi imaging in normal subjects and in patients with CAD.  These studies showed that treadmill and dipyridamole Tc-99m sestamibi imaging are comparable and the results are similar to those obtained with thallium-201.
Use of technetium-99m sestamibi to determine the size of the myocardial area perfused by a coronary artery.  The value of the new radionuclide tracer, technetium-99m (Tc-99m) sestamibi, to demonstrate myocardial perfusion in areas supplied by specific coronary arteries was evaluated in patients injected with the agent during cardiac catheterization.  Tc-99m sestamibi differs from thallium-201 in its physical characteristics (photon energy 140 keV), half-life (6 hours) and lack of significant redistribution, allowing its administration during an episode of chest pain or ischemia occurring outside the nuclear medicine laboratory with later imaging to visualize the distribution.  In 13 patients Tc-99m sestamibi was administered intravenously during balloon-occlusion angioplasty.  In 11 of 13 patients, defects of the single photon emission computed tomography images corresponded to the area made ischemic during angioplasty.  In the remaining 2 patients, abundant collateral flow was present and no defects were seen.  In a second study, 15 patients had Tc-99m sestamibi selectively injected into a coronary artery during angiography.  Later imaging identified the area supplied by the artery injected.  Tc-99m sestamibi imaging can detect perfusion defects associated with short episodes of ischemia, and the area supplied by the different coronary arteries.
Technetium-99m sestamibi in chronic coronary artery disease: the European experience.  Since the introduction of technetium-99m methoxy-isobutyl isonitrile (Tc-99m sestamibi) in Europe, there has been a growing interest in its use.  Several European multicenter trials have been conducted to evaluate this new agent in relation to the traditional perfusion marker thallium-201, and other studies are in progress to understand the use of this perfusion marker for the diagnosis of coronary disease, for use in conjunction with pharmacologic vasodilation, for use in the assessment of ventricular function and wall motion and for the assessment of interventions.
Percutaneous excimer laser coronary angioplasty.  To determine the efficacy of percutaneous excimer laser coronary angioplasty as an adjunct or alternative to conventional balloon angioplasty, 55 patients were studied in a multicenter trial.  These patients underwent the procedure using a modification of conventional balloon angioplasty technique.  A first-generation, 1.6-mm diameter catheter constructed of 12 individual silica fibers concentrically arranged around a guidewire lumen was used.  Catheter tip energy density varied from 35 to 50 mJ/mm2.  The mean number of pulses delivered at 20 Hz was 1,272 +/- 1,345.  Acute success was defined as a greater than or equal to 20% increase in stenotic diameter and a lumen of greater than or equal to 1 mm in diameter after laser treatment.  Acute success was achieved in 46 of 55 (84%) patients.  Adjunctive balloon angioplasty was performed on 41 patients (75%).  The percent diameter stenosis as determined by quantitative angiography decreased from a baseline of 83 +/- 14 to 49 +/- 11% after laser treatment and to 38 +/- 12% in patients undergoing adjunctive balloon angioplasty.  The mean minimal stenotic diameter increased from a baseline of 0.5 +/- 0.4 to 1.6 +/- 0.5 mm after laser treatment and to 2.1 +/- 0.5 mm after balloon angioplasty.  There were no deaths and no vascular perforations.  One patient (1.8%) required emergency coronary bypass surgery.  These data suggest that excimer laser energy delivered percutaneously by specially constructed catheters can safely ablate atheroma and reduce coronary stenoses.
Results of percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty in patients greater than or equal to 65 years of age (from the 1985 to 1986 National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Coronary Angioplasty Registry).  The 1985 to 1986 National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Percutaneous Transluminal Coronary Angioplasty (PTCA) Registry series of 1,801 initial procedures included 486 patients age greater than or equal to 65 years (elderly).  In comparison to younger patients, a greater proportion of elderly patients were women and had unstable angina.  Elderly patients had more history of hypertension and more history of congestive heart failure.  Although the elderly had more extensive vessel disease, the numbers of lesions and vessels attempted with PTCA were similar in the older and younger cohorts.  Angiographic success rates were similar for all age groups.  Although complication rates in the catheterization laboratory did not differ, patients greater than or equal to 65 years were much more likely to require emergency coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) (5.4 vs 2.8%, p less than 0.05) or elective CABG (3.9 vs 1.6%, p less than 0.01).  The in-hospital death rate was considerably higher among the elderly (3.1 vs 0.2%, p less than 0.01).  At 2-year follow-up, symptomatic status and cumulative rates of myocardial infarction, CABG and repeat PTCA were similar for elderly and younger patients.  The death rate after 2 years was higher among elderly patients (8.8% of patients greater than or equal to 65 years vs 2.9% of patients less than 65 years, p less than 0.01).  When the relative risk of death for the elderly was adjusted for factors more prevalent among those greater than or equal to 65 years (history of congestive heart failure, multivessel disease, unstable angina, history of hypertension and female gender), the relative risk remained significant but was substantially reduced (from 3.3 to 2.4).
Timing and mechanism of in-hospital and late death after primary coronary angioplasty during acute myocardial infarction.  The effect of early myocardial reperfusion on patterns of death after acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is unknown.  Thus, the mechanism and timing of in-hospital and late deaths among a group of 614 patients treated with coronary angioplasty without antecedent thrombolytic therapy for AMI were determined.  Death occurred in 49 patients (8%) before hospital discharge.  Four patients died in the catheterization laboratory.  Death was due to cardiogenic shock in 22 patients, acute vessel reclosure in 5 patients, was sudden in 8 patients and followed elective coronary artery bypass surgery in 8 patients.  Cardiac rupture was observed in only 2 patients after failed infarct angioplasty, and did not occur among the 574 patients with successful infarct reperfusion.  Intracranial hemorrhage did not occur.  Multivariate predictors of in-hospital death included failed infarct angioplasty, cardiogenic shock, 3-vessel coronary artery disease and age greater than or equal to 70 years.  During a follow-up period of 32 +/- 21 months (range 1 to 87), 55 patients died.  The cause of death was cardiac in 36 patients, including an arrhythmic death in 23 patients and was due to circulatory failure in 13 others.  One patient died of reinfarction due to late reclosure of the infarct artery.  Actuarial survival curves demonstrated overall survival after hospital discharge of 95 and 87% at 1 and 4 years, respectively.  Freedom from cardiac death at 1 and 4 years was 96 and 92%.  Multivariate predictors of late death included 3-vessel disease, a baseline ejection fraction of less than or equal to 40%, age greater than 70 years and female gender.
Circadian rhythm of heart rate variability after acute myocardial infarction and its influence on the prognostic value of heart rate variability.  This study examined heart rate (HR) variability in patients surviving acute myocardial infarction (AMI) to find the optimum time and duration of recording of the ambulatory electrocardiogram for the prediction of the risk of sudden cardiac death, or serious arrhythmic events, or both.  Twenty patients (group I) who initially survived an AMI but later experienced serious events (death or symptomatic sustained ventricular tachycardia) during a 6-month follow-up were compared with 20 patients (group II) who remained free of complications for greater than 6 months after discharge.  Groups I and II were matched with regard to age, gender, infarct site, ejection fraction, and beta-blocker treatment.  HR variability was assessed in the 24-hour electrocardiograms recorded during the first 2 weeks after an AMI and in various portions of the complete 24-hour recording, with both the beginning and the length of the analyzed portion varied by 20 minutes (a total of 5,113 possibilities).  The maximum reduction of HR variability in group I patients was systematically found when assessing HR variability in recordings starting approximately at 6 A.M.  and lasting for approximately 8 hours.  In the low-risk patient, the diurnal rhythm of HR variability is more marked than in the high-risk patient and the long-term components of HR variability due to the diurnal variation must be included in the measurement of HR variability when using it as a long-term predictor of risk from arrhythmic events after an AMI.
Doppler assessment of left ventricular filling pattern in silent ischemia in patients with Prinzmetal's angina.  Spontaneous angina is an ideal condition in which to study left ventricular (LV) dysfunction induced by acute myocardial ischemia.  In 6 patients with Prinzmetal's angina, LV diastolic function during 16 episodes of spontaneous angina was studied by simultaneous recordings of electrocardiographic (ECG), echocardiographic and hemodynamic parameters.  In particular, pulsed Doppler echocardiography measured peak velocity of early (E) and late (A) transmitral flow and E/A ratio, as indexes of relative early versus late LV filling.  During the ischemic attacks, the time sequence of pulsed Doppler echocardiographic and ECG changes showed 3 distinct phases: (1) "waxing phase: transmitral flow changes with minimal ECG modifications (E/A = 0.85 +/- 0.1); (2) "steady" phase: maximal ECG changes (E/A = 0.9 +/- 0.1); and (3) "waning" phase: regression of the ECG changes (E/A = 1.26 +/- 0.15).  In each phase, E/A ratio showed a significant difference from the baseline value (E/A = 1.17 +/- 0.2) as a result of changes in E, suggesting that myocardial ischemia affects mainly the early phase of diastole.  In the waxing phase, LV diastolic dysfunction preceded systolic abnormalities, as documented by a significant reduction of E/A ratio in the absence of alterations in LV ejection fraction, as well as in systemic arterial and pulmonary wedge pressures.  Finally, all the recorded parameters were consistent with LV "contractile rebound" occurring in the waning phase and affecting both diastole and systole.
Comparison of direct and indirect measures of systemic arterial pressure during weightlifting in coronary artery disease.  Based on auscultation measurements after exercise, circuit weight training in cardiac patients has been reported to provoke minimal increases in systolic pressure.  Direct (brachial artery catheter) and indirect (sphygmomanometry) measures of blood pressure were compared at rest, during lifting with the legs (approximately the fourth, ninth and fourteenth repetition) and during 2 minutes of recovery after lifting with the arms and legs.  Subjects performed 15 repetitions of single-arm curl, single-arm military press and single- and double-leg press exercises at 40 and 60% of the maximum load that could be lifted once on a multistation weightlifting apparatus.  Indirect measures of systolic pressure at rest were 13% less than those recorded directly (130 +/- 7 vs 149 +/- 8 torr; p less than 0.01); diastolic pressures were similar using either method.  This pattern was maintained during lifting with the legs at both intensities, and after exercise with both the legs and the arms.  The mean systolic pressure recorded indirectly immediately after exercise was 63 torr (31%) and 76 torr (34%) less than the average peak intraarterial value recorded during leg and arm exercises, respectively.  The highest intraarterial pressures were generated during the final repetitions of the set; immediately after the last repetition, both systolic and diastolic pressures rapidly decreased.  It is concluded that indirect estimates of systolic pressure are significantly less than true arterial values at rest, and during and after lifting.  Moreover, indirect measurements after lifting do not allow accurate conclusions to be drawn about the arterial pressures generated during lifting because of the rapid decrease in pressure that occurs after exercise.
Response of angiographically normal and atherosclerotic left anterior descending coronary arteries to acetylcholine.  Acetylcholine-induced constriction of human coronary arteries in vivo is commonly attributed to endothelial dysfunction.  To examine the effects of 2 other important determinants of vascular responses--namely, agonist concentration and the segment of circulation under study--the diameters of proximal, middle and distal segments of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and coronary sinus oxygen saturation were measured in 10 patients with angiographically normal coronary arteries (group 1) and in 7 patients with coronary atherosclerosis (group 2) after intracoronary acetylcholine was infused at concentrations from 10(-7)M to between 10(-4)M and 10(-2)M.  In group 1, acetylcholine caused minor (less than or equal to 6%) but progressive dilatation of the LAD up to 10(-4)M, but constriction, particularly of the distal segments and tertiary branches, occurred at higher concentrations.  Over the same concentration range, coronary sinus oxygen saturation rose progressively from a basal level of 36 +/- 3% to a maximum of 72 +/- 3% in the absence of changes in heart rate and blood pressure, suggesting marked progressive dilatation of resistance vessels.  Concentrations greater than or equal to 10(-3)M caused intense constriction of distal epicardial vessels and, in some cases, anginal pain and objective signs of ischemia.  Conversely, in group 2, acetylcholine (infused only up to 10(-4)M for ethical reasons) failed to cause significant changes in LAD diameter.  These data suggest that the local acetylcholine concentration and coronary vascular segment under study may determine the observed response to at least an equivalent extent as does the presence or absence of coronary atherosclerosis, raising the question of whether a constrictor response to intracoronary acetylcholine reliably indicates the presence of coronary atherosclerosis.
Clinical and electrophysiologic characteristics of patients with antidromic circus movement tachycardia in the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.  Antidromic circus movement tachycardia was documented in 36 of 345 consecutive patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome undergoing detailed electrophysiologic evaluation.  Twenty-six patients were men and 10 were women (mean age +/- standard deviation 26 +/- 12 years [range 12 to 45]).  Multiple accessory pathways were identified in 12 of these 36 patients (33%).  Ten of the patients (67%) with clinically documented antidromic tachycardia had multiple accessory pathways.  Dizziness and syncope occurred in 61 and 50% of patients with antidromic circus movement tachycardia.  Six patients had clinical documentation of atrial fibrillation, and 4 patients (11%) were resuscitated from ventricular fibrillation.  In the 36 patients, 56 distinct antidromic tachycardias were recorded and several different pathways were observed.  Orthodromic tachycardia was the most frequently associated arrhythmia (72%).  Dual atrioventricular nodal pathways were present in 12 patients (33%); however, atrioventricular nodal tachycardia could be initiated in only 2 of them.  Interruption of the accessory pathway was successfully performed in all 20 patients undergoing surgery.
Electrocardiographic signal-averaging during atrial pacing and effect of cycle length on the terminal QRS in patients with and without inducible ventricular tachycardia.  Electrocardiographic signal-averaging during sinus rhythm (61 to 99 beats/min) and atrial pacing (100 to 171 beats/min) were performed to determine the effect of heart rate on late potentials in 15 patients without (group 1) and 7 patients with (group 2) inducible sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT).  In sinus rhythm (79 +/- 12 vs 77 +/- 12 beats/min, difference not significant), the duration of the low-amplitude signal less than 40 microV was longer in group 2 than group 1 (43 +/- 21 vs 26 +/- 8 ms, p = 0.034) and more patients had late potentials (57 vs 7%, p = 0.021), but QRS duration (121 +/- 32 vs 98 +/- 19 ms) and terminal voltage (33 +/- 33 vs 50 +/- 26 ms) were not significantly different.  With atrial pacing in group 1 (128 +/- 16 beats/min), 3 patients developed a simultaneous decrease in terminal voltage and an increase in terminal QRS duration consistent with a late potential, but mean total and terminal durations were unchanged.  Terminal voltage increased (50 +/- 26 to 59 +/- 40) but not significantly.  With atrial pacing in group 2 (119 +/- 12 beats/min) all patients either had a late potential or developed a simultaneous decrease in terminal voltage and an increase in terminal QRS duration (p = 0.001 vs group 1).  Root mean square (p = 0.001 vs group 1).  Root mean square voltage decreased (33 +/- 23 to 22 +/- 23) and became significantly different from group 1 (p = 0.017).  Mean QRS duration, root mean square terminal voltage and low-amplitude terminal QRS duration, however, were unchanged.
Comparison of intravenous amrinone and dobutamine in congestive heart failure due to idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.  A prospective randomized study was performed in 46 consecutive patients with refractory congestive heart failure (CHF) due to idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy to compare the hemodynamic responses to 48-hour infusions of amrinone and dobutamine.  Both drugs substantially reduced pulmonary arterial wedge pressure, right atrial pressure and systemic vascular resistance and increased cardiac index.  Amrinone caused a greater decrease in right atrial pressure than dobutamine (p less than 0.02) and had a positive chronotropic effect not observed with dobutamine (p less than 0.01).  The increase in heart rate produced by amrinone correlated inversely with the changes in right atrial and pulmonary arterial wedge pressures, suggesting a baroreceptor response to reduced preload.  Dobutamine produced a larger increase in stroke volume index than amrinone (p less than 0.01).  Ninety-one percent of patients receiving amrinone and only 65% receiving dobutamine had reduction of greater than or equal to 30% in pulmonary arterial wedge pressure (p less than 0.05).  Cardiac index increased greater than or equal to 30% in similar numbers of patients given amrinone (74%) and dobutamine (65%).  Negative fluid balance was recorded in all patients receiving amrinone and in 78% of patients receiving dobutamine (p less than 0.05).  Target hemodynamic criteria were achieved in 83% of patients receiving 10 micrograms/kg/min of amrinone.  The effective maintenance dose of dobutamine was extremely variable.  No clinically important adverse effects were observed with either drug regimen.  Both amrinone and dobutamine are effective and safe agents for short-term parenteral therapy of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy in severe CHF that is unresponsive to oral medication.
Value of carvedilol in congestive heart failure secondary to coronary artery disease.  Despite considerable interest in the use of beta-blocking agents in congestive heart failure (CHF), their clinical application is limited because of their negative inotropic effects.  Beta blockers with vasodilating properties may have the advantage of overcoming this, however.  Carvedilol, a beta-blocking agent with vasodilating properties, was evaluated in 17 patients with chronic CHF secondary to ischemic heart disease with a resting left ventricular ejection fraction less than or equal to 45%, who were being maintained on diuretics.  Exercise testing, radionuclide ventriculography, and right-sided cardiac catheterization were performed and intraarterial blood pressure measured before and after 8 weeks of carvedilol therapy in a dosage of 12.5 to 50.0 mg twice a day.  Twelve patients completed the study and 5 withdrew.  Symptomatic and hemodynamic improvement was demonstrated in 11 of the 12 patients.  Heart rate and intraarterial blood pressure were both reduced by chronic therapy.  Mean +/- standard deviation exercise time improved from 4.3 +/- 1.6 to 7.1 +/- 2.7 minutes (p less than 0.0001), as did resting left ventricular ejection fraction, from 27 +/- 9 to 31 +/- 11% (p less than 0.02).  Pulmonary arterial wedge pressure fell from 19 +/- 7 mm Hg to 12 +/- 5 mm Hg (p less than 0.001) and total systemic vascular resistance from 1,752 +/- 403 to 1,497 +/- 310 dynes/s/cm-5/m2 (p less than 0.02).  Stroke volume index improved also, from 31 +/- 6 ml to 40 +/- 6 ml (p less than 0.0005).  These hemodynamic changes were mediated partly by vasodilation, diminished myocardial oxygen demand and reduction of sympathetic overactivity in the failing heart.  These data suggest that carvedilol may have beneficial effects in patients with chronic CHF secondary to coronary artery disease.
Improvement in early diastolic filling dynamics after aortic valve replacement.  With use of ultrafast computed tomography, 13 patients undergoing aortic valve replacement for aortic stenosis were prospectively followed to evaluate the relation between left ventricular mass and diastolic function.  Studies were done before intervention, and then at 4 and 8 months later.  Mass decreased from 161 +/- 11 g/m2 (+/- standard error of the mean) at baseline to 106 +/- 5 g/m2, and then to 97 +/- 7 g/m2 at 4 and 8 months, respectively, in 12 patients who demonstrated significant (greater than 20%) mass regression after operation.  One patient failed to show significant changes in mass.  Diastolic function, as defined by the peak filling rate of early diastole, improved (p less than 0.02) in the group with mass regression, from 2.11 +/- 0.17 s-1 at baseline to 2.12 +/- 0.23 s-1, and then to 2.62 +/- 0.26 s-1 at 4 and 8 months, respectively.  Improvement in the time to peak filling rate was also noted.  Heart rates were unchanged, whereas end-diastolic volumes decreased and ejection fractions increased slightly.  Postoperative increase in peak filling rate correlated with regression of ventricular mass to within normal range (+/- 2 standard deviations) and attainment of New York Heart Association class I status by 8 months (p less than 0.02).  Thus, improvement in diastolic function can be seen after aortic valve surgery and is associated with improved functional class.  Diastolic function improves later than the regression in wall mass and may imply a delayed remodeling of the ventricle.
Relevance of intrinsic sympathomimetic activity for beta blockers.  Intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA) characterizes a group of beta blockers that are able to stimulate beta-adrenergic receptors (agonist effect) and to oppose the stimulating effects of catecholamines (antagonist effect) in a competitive way.  Partial agonists are ligands that elicit a submaximal response when bound to beta receptors at maximal occupancy.  In the isolated rat atrium, acebutolol produces a maximal stimulatory effect that is only 17 +/- 8% of the maximal effect induced by the full beta agonist isoproterenol.  The presence of ISA results in less resting bradycardia and less of a reduction in cardiac output than is observed with beta blockers without ISA.  In the long term, partial beta agonists may produce arterial vasodilation and increase arterial compliance, possibly leading to additional beneficial effects in the treatment of hypertension.  beta blockers with ISA do not have adverse effects on plasma lipoproteins during long-term treatment; in addition, the presence of ISA could counteract the up-regulation of beta adrenoceptors often observed with beta blockers without ISA.  Finally, the presence of ISA has been a conflicting issue for the use of such beta blockers in secondary prevention after myocardial infarction.  However, the impressive results of the Acebutolol Prevention of Secondary Infarction trial in high-risk patients after myocardial infarction show that acebutolol, a beta blocker with moderate partial agonist activity, can be effective in decreasing the postinfarction mortality rate.  By exhibiting a strikingly different hemodynamic profile from that of beta blockers without ISA, the partial beta agonists form an intriguing pharmacologic class of drugs for which prospective clinical trials should be extensively pursued.
Efficacy of acebutolol after acute myocardial infarction (the APSI trial). The APSI Investigators.  A randomized, placebo-controlled trial was carried out to determine the effectiveness of acebutolol in preventing late death in high-risk patients surviving an acute myocardial infarction (MI).  The average 1-year mortality rate in placebo groups of 9 trials of beta blockers in post-MI patients was 7.2% compared with 17% in a nonselected cohort of patients who had survived at least 7 days after an MI.  The mandate for this trial was based on the fact that high-risk patients whose mortality rate exceeds 20% have not been enrolled in significant numbers in previous trials.  It remains to be proved whether beta-blocking therapy in this patient population is beneficial.  Selection of high-risk patients for inclusion in the trial was based on an algorithm set up from the Essai de Prevention Secondaire de l'Infarctus du Myocarde Registry.  At the time of the second interim analysis, the mortality rate in the placebo group was 12%, lower than expected (greater than or equal to 20%).  The trial was stopped; at that time, 309 patients had been allocated to placebo and 298 patients to acebutolol therapy.  After 318 days, there were 17 deaths in the acebutolol-treated group and 34 in the placebo group, a reduction in total mortality of 48% (p = 0.019).  There were 30 vascular deaths in the placebo group and 12 in the acebutolol group.  Thus, cardiovascular mortality with acebutolol was reduced by 58% (p = 0.006).  The incidence of all cardiovascular-related deaths was lower in the acebutolol-treated group.  The total reduction in mortality did not appear to be correlated with secondary risk factors.
Secondary prevention of acute myocardial infarction with beta-blocking agents and calcium antagonists.  The discovery that beta blockers possess clinically useful hypotensive, antianginal and antiarrhythmic properties has attracted the interest of clinicians, researchers and the pharmaceutical community alike.  In addition, minor differences in a variety of ancillary properties have led to speculation that specific classes of drugs might have advantages over other classes.  The enthusiasm that greeted reports from the first small trials, which showed that beta blockers reduced the postmyocardial infarction mortality rate, attracted the commercial support necessary to evaluate different beta blockers in this clinical setting.  The plethora of beta blockers that subsequently became available for study led to considerable improvement in both the design and implementation of large clinical trials.  Despite apparent discrepancies in the results of various trials, meta-analysis indicates that most, if not all, beta blockers reduce postinfarction mortality.  However, because meta-analysis cannot recommend a particular drug or specific dose for use in an individual patient, clinical practice must be based on the results of individual trials, not on the conclusions of meta-analysis.  The clinical utility of beta blockers in the secondary prevention of myocardial infarction, coupled with experimental evidence that calcium antagonists reduce infarct size, led to a series of large studies designed to establish whether calcium antagonists have any effect on reducing mortality in patients with myocardial infarction.  Lessons learned from the beta-blocker trials permitted a more rapid evaluation of the efficacy of calcium antagonists in this setting.  It is clear that, unlike beta blockers, calcium antagonists are not effective in the secondary prevention of myocardial infarction.
Characteristics of participants at baseline in the Treatment of Mild Hypertension Study (TOMHS).  The Treatment of Mild Hypertension Study (TOMHS) is a randomized, double-blind clinical trial currently being conducted to compare the effects of nonpharmacologic therapy alone with those of 1 of 5 active drug regimens combined with nonpharmacologic therapy, for long-term management of patients with mild hypertension.  Six classes of drugs were studied: (1) acebutolol (beta blocker), (2) amlodipine (calcium antagonist), (3) chlorthalidone (diuretic), (4) doxazosin (alpha 1 antagonist), (5) enalapril (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor) and (6) placebo.  All participants received nutritional-hygienic advice to reduce weight and sodium and alcohol intakes and to increase physical activity.  End points include blood pressure change, side effects and quality-of-life indices; incidence of electrocardiographic and echocardiographic abnormalities; and incidence of cardiovascular clinical events, including death, among participants receiving drugs as first-step treatment as well as nonpharmacologic treatment compared with incidence among those participants randomized to nonpharmacologic treatment only as the initial step.
Mechanical factors in large artery disease and antihypertensive drugs.  Hypertension may induce early alterations in large arteries by 2 mechanical stresses: one related to intravascular pressure, the other to blood flow dynamics.  Distending pressure force acts in a circumferential direction, inducing decreased arterial distensibility.  Arterial distensibility can be evaluated in humans by measurement of arterial compliance and pulse-wave velocity.  It is well established that in chronic hypertension age and elevated pressure act together to increase arterial rigidity.  Blood flow dynamics induce frictional forces in the endothelial surfaces of arteries.  These forces, expressed by shear stress, are proportional to the viscosity of the blood and to the velocity gradient at the arterial wall.  Measurement of blood viscosity and evaluation of velocity profile in the brachial arteries of hypertensive subjects have shown a reduction in wall shear rate and stress despite the elevation in blood viscosity.  Several studies have shown that drug therapy that successfully reduces blood pressure does not necessarily improve arterial compliance.  In contrast, few data are available on the effects of antihypertensive medication on arterial wall shear in humans.  Arterial compliance and wall shear stress are 2 main therapeutic targets of potential importance in the physiopharmacologic approach to the effects of hypertension on atherogenesis.
Documentation of the effective length of action of antihypertensive treatment.  The technique of automated ambulatory blood pressure (BP) monitoring offers an innovative means for measuring BP throughout the 24-hour period.  Recently available compact monitoring instruments have been shown to be accurate and to provide reproducible measurements of the circadian BP pattern.  The monitoring procedure is advantageous in that it minimizes or avoids placebo effects during therapeutic trials.  Moreover, its power makes it possible to draw statistically valid conclusions regarding efficacy in fewer patients than would be required if conventional methods were used.  This procedure also enhances the diagnosis of hypertension by identifying patients with "office" or "white coat" hypertension, and thereby facilitates assessment of treatment effects in those patients who are truly hypertensive.  Automated monitoring measures BP at critical times of the day, including the preawakening and early morning hours, and it enables peak and trough antihypertensive drug effects to be carefully quantified.  Since patient compliance appears to be enhanced with once- or twice-daily dosing, antihypertensive agents with long durations of action (24 hours) are of considerable interest.  This report reviews some recent studies in which the monitoring technique has been used to measure the efficacy and duration of action of differing antihypertensive drugs.
Acebutolol effects on lipid profile [published erratum appears in Am J Cardiol 1990 Dec 1;66(19):A8]  The relation between lipid profile and the incidence of coronary artery disease has been confirmed by the results of epidemiologic and intervention studies.  Among antihypertensive agents, beta blockers, particularly those without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA), are generally reported to have negative effects on lipids, which may increase the risk of coronary artery disease.  The ongoing Treatment of Mild Hypertension Study, now in its third year, has evaluated 847 patients to date with regard to lipid profile.  Additional end points measured in this multicenter, randomized, controlled, double-blind study include blood pressure reduction and target organ deterioration.  During the trial, all patients received nutritional and behavioral counselling to modify their diet, exercise habits and alcohol and sodium consumption to control their hypertension by nonpharmacologic means.  In addition, some patients were randomized to receive low doses of 1 of the 5 classes of antihypertensive medication: acebutolol, a beta blocker with ISA (n = 124); amlodipine, a calcium channel blocker (n = 122); chlorthalidone, a diuretic (n = 125); doxazosin, an alpha blocker (n = 128); enalapril, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (n = 127) or placebo (n = 221).  At 1 year, acebutolol showed a statistically significant (p less than 0.001) decrease in total cholesterol (-12.7 mg/dl) compared with placebo (-5.2 mg/dl) and with chlorthalidone (1.0 mg/dl); a significant (p less than 0.001) decrease in low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (-6.0 mg/dl) compared with placebo (+0.7 mg/dl) and with chlorthalidone (+8.0 mg/dl) and no change in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (-0.4 mg/dl).
Overview: renal physiology and pathophysiology of aging.  Cross-sectional studies in humans have suggested that there is a progressive decline of renal function with age after 40 years.  The decline in various functions (eg, tubular maximums, concentrating and diluting abilities, and acidification) tend to parallel the decreases in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and renal blood (plasma) flow (RPF).  Recent observations from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging suggest that not all individuals follow this pattern, and that, indeed, many show no decline and some even an increase in their renal function over time.  Whether the observed decreases in renal function with aging are the results of intervening pathologic processes, eg, immunologic, infectious, and toxic injury and ischemia, or can be related to hyperperfusion and hyperfiltration with resultant glomerulosclerosis, or to some other relentless involutional process, remains unclear.  The purpose of this report is to review the descriptive studies documenting the changes in renal morphology and physiology with age and to discuss what is known about mechanisms involved in these losses of renal substance and function.
Systolic hypertension in the elderly: reasons not to treat.  Isolated systolic hypertension in the elderly is associated with increased morbidity and mortality.  Accurate measurement of blood pressure in older patients is difficult.  Therapy can be associated with various complications, and the special problems of the elderly, such as orthostatic hypotension and hyperkalemia, should be carefully considered.  Drugs should be used in low doses and changes in dosage should be made infrequently.  Patients should be monitored frequently for untoward effects of therapy.  The benefits of blood pressure reduction and the optimal degree of blood pressure reduction remain unknown.
Cardiac contractility and conduction: a comparison of antihypertensives.  The four classes of first-line antihypertensive agents recommended in the 1988 report of the Joint National Committee on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure are reviewed here.  Particular consideration is given to the effects of these agents on heart rate, atrioventricular nodal conduction, and myocardial contractility in patients with other cardiovascular diseases.  Diuretics and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors have no significant direct effects on cardiac function.  beta-Blockers inhibit catecholamine stimulation of the heart and may be particularly beneficial in treating patients with a history of myocardial infarction.  Calcium channel blockers reduce blood pressure by dilating arterial resistance vessels.  They are structurally heterogeneous and highly selective in their sites of action.  As a consequence, cardiac effects can be minimized by selecting a calcium channel blocker with more potent peripheral vasodilatory effects.  A new calcium channel blocker, isradipine, currently undergoing clinical trials, is highly selective for arterial smooth muscle and appears to be a safe and effective antihypertensive agent.
Hypertension: racial differences.  Racial differences in the prevalence, course, and pathophysiologic characteristics of hypertension in black and white populations are reviewed.  Accumulated epidemiologic data indicate that the prevalence of hypertension among blacks is greater than that among whites in almost all age- and sex-matched groups.  Hypertensive blacks have a higher incidence of left ventricular dysfunction, stroke, and renal damage, but a lower incidence of ischemic heart disease, than do hypertensive whites.  A significant pathophysiologic difference between blacks and whites is salt sensitivity; normotensive, as well as hypertensive, blacks tend to be salt sensitive.  Blacks also tend to have lower renin levels than do whites, while dopamine response to a salt load is diminished among blacks as compared with whites.  These differences and others lead to the recommendation that hypertension among blacks should be managed initially with salt restriction; if dietary control is insufficient, administration of an antihypertensive agent with 24-hour efficacy, which lowers vascular peripheral resistance, promotes sodium excretion, and potentially improves renal hemodynamics, is recommended.  A calcium channel blocker may satisfy these requirements.
Diet, smoking, and alcohol: influence on coronary heart disease risk.  The Framingham study on coronary heart disease (CHD) has shown that life-style, particularly diet, smoking, and alcohol consumption, has a great impact on the incidence of CHD.  Blood lipoproteins, rather than total blood cholesterol, have been found to be more accurate predictors of CHD risk.  Blood triglyceride, previously considered to have little bearing on CHD risk, was found to have a negative impact in many cases.  A population subgroup with high triglyceride greater than or equal to 1.7 mmol/L (greater than or equal to 150 mg/dL), low high-density lipoprotein less than or equal to 1.04 mmol/L (less than or equal to 40 mg/dL), increased insulin resistance, and a higher incidence of diabetes mellitus has been found to be at increased risk for CHD.  Diet intervention trials have shown that a reduction in total cholesterol and saturated fat consumption produced reduction in CHD incidence proportionate to the fall in cholesterol.  Cigarette smoking increased CHD risk moderately; those who smoked one pack per day had twice the risk of nonsmokers.  Alcohol consumption actually lowered CHD incidence in the Framingham study; however, when alcohol consumption was greater than two drinks per day, a rise in mortality from cancer and stroke was observed.
Further mapping of an ataxia-telangiectasia locus to the chromosome 11q23 region.  We recently mapped the gene for ataxia-telangiectasia group A (ATA) to chromosome 11q22-23 by linkage analysis, using the genetic markers THY1 and pYNB3.12 (D11S144).  The most likely order was cent-AT-S144-THY1.  The present paper describes further mapping of the AT locus by means of a panel of 10 markers that span approximately 60 cM in the 11q22-23 region centered around S144 and THY1.  Location scores indicate that three contiguous subsegments within the [S144-THY1] segment, as well as three contiguous segments telomeric to THY1, are each unlikely to contain the AT locus, while the more centromeric [STMY-S144] segment is most likely to contain the AT locus.  These data, together with recent refinements in the linkage and physical maps of 11q22-23, place the AT locus at 11q23.
Digitalis-like activity in human plasma: relation to blood pressure and sodium balance.  PURPOSE: On the assumption that renal tubular cells are more important as the target cells for a natriuretic factor than blood cells, we used a well-characterized cultured renal tubular cell line, Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK), cells to monitor the circulating digitalis-like factor in human plasma and examine its role in the regulation of blood pressure and sodium balance.  SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We investigated the effects of plasma on binding of radioactive ouabain to monolayered MDCK cells in order to determine the level of a circulating digitalis-like factor.  First, we measured specific 3H-ouabain binding to MDCK cells in the presence of plasma from 71 outpatients (34 normotensive subjects and 37 hypertensive patients) after incubation for 4 hours.  Second, we measured specific 3H-ouabain binding after incubation of cells with plasma from 16 hospitalized subjects (eight normotensive subjects and eight hypertensive patients) receiving low and high sodium diets.  RESULTS: In Study 1, ouabain binding was lower by 30% with plasma from hypertensive patients than with plasma from normotensive subjects (p less than 0.01).  There was a significant negative correlation between individual subject's systolic or mean blood pressure and ouabain binding (r = -0.34, p less than 0.01 or r = -0.29, p less than 0.01).  In Study 2, ouabain binding was also significantly reduced by 25% in the presence of plasma from hypertensive subjects as compared with plasma from normotensive subjects irrespective of sodium intake (p less than 0.01).  A significant negative correlation was also found for all subjects between either systolic, diastolic, or mean blood pressure and ouabain binding (r = -0.58, p less than 0.01, r = -0.51, p less than 0.01, or r = -0.55, p less than 0.01, respectively).  With the changes from low to high sodium intake, there was a corresponding decrease in ouabain binding (p less than 0.01) and an increase in sodium excretion (p less than 0.01).  A significant negative correlation was observed between these two parameters (r = -0.47, p less than 0.05).  CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that a circulating digitalis-like factor, which may act on renal tubular cells as the ouabain-displacing compound, is increased in patients with essential hypertension and also demonstrate that plasma levels may be influenced by changes in dietary sodium intake.
Oral contraceptives, lipoproteins, and atherosclerosis.  A nonhuman primate model was developed to study the effects of oral contraceptives on lipoproteins and atherosclerosis.  Cynomolgus macaques were selected because of their susceptibility to diet-induced atherosclerosis and because their reproductive physiology, menstrual cycle, and circulating sex hormone patterns are similar to those of human females.  The first study compared a vaginal ring containing levonorgestrel and estradiol with an oral contraceptive containing norgestrel and ethinyl estradiol.  A second study compared two oral combinations: norgestrel-ethinyl estradiol and ethynodiol diacetate-ethinyl estradiol.  As predicted, use of all the contraceptives led to lowering of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels.  However, contrary to what might be expected, use of the ethinyl estradiol-containing oral contraceptives did not lead to an increase in the prevalence or extent of atherosclerosis.  We concluded that ethinyl estradiol neutralized the atherogenic influence of the progestin component of oral contraceptives.
Immunohistochemical study of fibronectin in experimental myocardial infarction.  Light microscopic immunohistochemical studies were performed to evaluate the distribution of fibronectin in paraffin sections of p-formaldehyde-fixed normal rat hearts and the hearts of rats that had undergone ligation of the left coronary artery.  A peroxidase-labeled antibody technique was used, together with appropriate immunohistochemical control procedures, for the localization of fibronectin in normal hearts and in the hearts of sham-operated animals.  Fibronectin was localized in the interstitial space between myocytes, and beneath arterial, venous, and capillary endothelium.  At 4 hours after coronary ligation, fibronectin was localized in a patchy fashion in the cytoplasm and interstitial space of some of the myocytes in the area supplied by the ligated vessel.  At 24 hours, there was more intense, homogeneous staining in necrotic myocytes in the infarcted area and in the capillary endothelium in the border zone.  At 48 hours, the intensity of staining for fibronectin was maximal in and between the necrotic myocytes in the center of the infarct and in proliferating and migrating capillaries and fibroblasts in the border zone.  Similar patterns of localization were observed at 3 and 7 days after coronary ligation, but with progressive decreases in the intensity of staining.  Two sources of fibronectin appeared to have contributed to these changes: plasma fibronectin diffusing through damaged blood vessels would account for the early staining observed in necrotic myocytes in the center of the infarct, whereas de novo synthesis of fibronectin by connective tissue cells and endothelial cells in sprouting capillaries would be responsible for the subsequent staining observed in viable capillaries in the border zone of the infarct.  Known properties of fibronectin in vitro, combined with these in vivo observations, indicate that fibronectin may influence the thrombotic, inflammatory, angiogenic, and fibrotic processes involved in infarct healing.
Accelerated arteriosclerosis in heart transplant recipients is associated with a T-lymphocyte-mediated endothelialitis.  Accelerated arteriosclerosis has emerged as a major life-threatening complication in long-term survivors of heart transplantation.  It has been proposed that accelerated arteriosclerosis is an immune-mediated complication of rejection.  We observed a striking endothelialitis in the coronary arteries of two explanted hearts obtained from patients with severe transplant-related accelerated arteriosclerosis.  This finding prompted us to review the pathologic changes in the coronary arteries of 23 autopsied patients who had received heart transplants.  The infiltrate in these vessels was characterized using immunohistochemical stains for lymphocytes (CD45), macrophages (MAC-387), T lymphocytes (CD45RO), B lymphocytes (L-26), and smooth muscle cells (actin).  In addition, a full panel of monoclonal antibodies was used on the fresh-frozen tissue available from one of the two explanted hearts.  Ten of the eleven recipients with accelerated arteriosclerosis had a moderate to marked lymphocytic endothelialitis compared to 3 of 14 without transplant-related arteriosclerosis (P less than 0.005).  Immunohistochemical staining of the paraffin-embedded material demonstrated that most of the lymphocytes in the subendothelial space of these vessels were T lymphocytes and that this infiltrate was associated with an accumulation of macrophages and a proliferation of smooth muscle cells in the intima.  In the explanted heart from which fresh-frozen tissue was available for more detailed cell typing, the T cells marked predominantly as cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CD8+, CD2+).  These results suggest that accelerated arteriosclerosis may be mediated, in part, by a cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-directed endothelialitis.
Does isoflurane lead to a higher incidence of myocardial infarction and perioperative death than enflurane in coronary artery surgery? A clinical study of 1178 patients   To examine if the choice of volatile agents influences cardiac outcome in coronary artery surgery, 1178 patients undergoing elective coronary artery bypass grafting without additional operations received enflurane (608) or isoflurane (570) as their primary anesthetics.  The inspired concentration of volatile agent (administered with 50% nitrous oxide) was adjusted depending on the level of blood pressure at the discretion of the anesthesiologist.  In addition to the volatile agent assigned, each patient received small doses of fentanyl at induction and before sternotomy (total 0.006-0.008 mg/kg).  The groups did not differ in preoperative and surgical characteristics except for a more frequent history of renal dysfunction in patients given isoflurane.  The rates of postoperative myocardial infarction, administration of positive inotropic agents at the time of weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass, and in-hospital deaths in the enflurane and isoflurane groups were 1.8% and 4.0% (P less than 0.05), 4.9% and 8.1% (P less than 0.05%), and 0.3% and 2.1% (P less than 0.01), respectively.  Although the mechanism of the adverse effects of isoflurane could not be clarified in this study, these results demonstrate that the use of isoflurane could be inappropriate in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting.
Hemodynamic effects of diltiazem during vasoconstrictor pulmonary hypertension in sheep.  Calcium channel blockers have been effective as pulmonary vasodilators in patients with pulmonary hypertension.  The current study therefore compared the effects of prostaglandin E1, an effective pulmonary vasodilator, with the effects of the water-soluble calcium channel blocker diltiazem during pulmonary hypertension in sheep.  Pulmonary hypertension was produced by continuous intravenous administration of U46619 to halothane-anesthetized sheep.  Prostaglandin E1 decreased pulmonary artery pressure 29%, decreased pulmonary vascular resistance (Rp) 57%, and did not affect the ratio of pulmonary to systemic vascular resistance (Rp/Rs).  Diltiazem decreased pulmonary artery pressure 15%, decreased Rp 50%, and did not affect Rp/Rs.  When 0.33 mL/kg polyethylene glycol-ethanol vehicle (the vehicle used for nifedipine administration in a prior study) was administered during diltiazem infusion, pulmonary artery pressure increased 19%, Rp increased 72%, and Rp/Rs increased 29%.  These results indicate that diltiazem is an effective pulmonary vasodilator and suggest that the previously reported unfavorable results of nifedipine may have been due to the vehicle used for nifedipine administration.
Changes in cerebral blood flow velocity after release of intraoperative tourniquets in humans: a transcranial Doppler study.  The effect of release of intraoperative thigh tourniquets on velocity of blood flow in the middle cerebral artery was examined in five patients given general anesthesia with controlled ventilation for lower extremity orthopedic procedures using transcranial Doppler sonography.  Middle cerebral artery blood flow velocity increased significantly from 52 +/- 6 (SEM) to 82 +/- 24 cm/s (an increase of 58% +/- 13%) within 4 +/- 1 min after tourniquet release and remained significantly elevated for 7 min.  A positive linear correlation was found between middle cerebral artery blood flow velocity and PETCO2 on each occasion (0.97 greater than or equal to r greater than or equal to 0.84, 0.001 greater than P greater than 0.0001) after tourniquet deflation.  Assuming a linear relationship between flow velocity and flow, these findings suggest that significant increase in cerebral blood flow can occur after intraoperative tourniquet release and that this increase appears to be mostly CO2-dependent.
Cardioprotective effects of carnitine in extensive aortocoronary bypass grafting: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial.  The cardioprotective effects of carnitine were tested in patients undergoing multiple aortocoronary bypass grafting.  Intermittent aortic cross-clamping at 28 degrees C was used.  Mean total cross-clamping time was 30 +/- 11 min.  Patients were randomized into three groups: a control group receiving placebo (group 1), a group pretreated with 3 g carnitine intravenously before cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) (group 2), and a group pretreated with 6 g carnitine intravenously (group 3).  The markers of myocardial ischemia included levels of adenosine triphosphate, its catabolites, and creatine phosphate in transmural left ventricular biopsy specimens taken at the beginning and end of CPB, as well as hemodynamic recovery during weaning from CPB and for the next 24 h.  The intravenous infusion of carnitine (3 or 6 g) had no hemodynamic effect.  At the end of CPB myocardial tissue levels of adenosine triphosphate and creatine phosphate did not differ significantly among the groups (P greater than 0.05).  Recovery of cardiac function during weaning from CPB and for the following 24 h was similar in all three groups (P greater than 0.05).  It is concluded that pretreatment with carnitine neither facilitates weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass in patients undergoing aortocoronary bypass surgery nor favorably affects hemodynamic function during the next 24 h.
Endogenous vasopressin supports blood pressure and prevents severe hypotension during epidural anesthesia in conscious dogs.  To evaluate whether, and to what extent, release of endogenous vasopressin supports blood pressure when efferent sympathetic drive is blocked by epidural anesthesia, the authors studied the effects of high epidural anesthesia alone and when vasopressin was prevented from acting at its vascular (V1)-receptor in six awake, trained, unsedated dogs.  On different days, the same dose of 0.5% bupivacaine (8-13 ml) was injected epidurally in a randomized fashion either in the presence or absence of (V1)-vasopressin receptor blockade, and the effects were evaluated on cardiovascular (arterial blood pressure, heart rate) and respiratory (blood gases, oxygen consumption) variables, and on plasma concentrations of vasopressin and renin.  Results were also contrasted to those obtained after epidural injection of saline alone (placebo) in the same dogs.  When endogenous vasopressin was prevented from acting by intravenous pretreatment with a specific V1-receptor antagonist (beta-mercapto-beta, beta-cyclopenta-methylene-propionyl-O-Me-Tyr-Arg-Vasopressin), epidural anesthesia resulted in a rapid and sustained 35% decrease in mean arterial blood pressure from 92 mmHg +/- 5 SE to 60 mmHg +/- 4.  In contrast, only a 14% decrease in mean blood pressure from 92 mmHg +/- 5 to 79 mm Hg +/- 6 was noted after epidural anesthesia alone.  This difference between groups was statistically significant (P = 0.0001).  The V1-receptor blockade alone had no detectable effect.  Vasopressin plasma concentrations significantly increased from 3.4 +/- 0.3 pg.ml-1 to 16.2 +/- 3.2 pg.ml-1 after epidural anesthesia but did not change after epidural saline.
Experimental and clinical percutaneous angioscopy experience with dynamic angioplasty.  The authors have used ultrathin angioscopes with high optical resolution to assess the effects of dynamic angioplasty in vitro and in vivo.  Experimentally, angioscopy was used to study the effects of the 5F "Kensey" catheter in "normal" porcine coronary arteries (NPCA) and postmortem human coronary arteries (PMHCA).  In NPCA, the catheter keeps a coaxial position.  Intimal flaps (IFs) were seen in 21/23 NPCAs.  They occurred with all cam rotation speeds and were usually single and small (less than 25% of lumen).  Perforations in patent arteries were rare (1/23).  However, when the catheter was forced against the wall by passing through a narrowing of 5F diameter (made by a band ligature), perforations were more common at higher cam speeds.  The epicardium remained intact in two thirds of perforations.  Angioscopy visualized perforations in only 10% of cases (1/10), the common sign being that of large and multiple intimal flaps, which were often obstructive (5/10).  In PMHCAs, angioscopy was more sensitive than angiography in detecting atheromatous lesions.  The authors were able to give a better assessment of the effect of dynamic angioplasty on treated lesions, including the demonstration of intimal flaps that were not visible on angiography.  In vivo, they have performed percutaneous angioscopy before and after dynamic angioplasty using 8 French Kensey catheters.  Angioscopy revealed features that were not shown angiographically.
Optimizing heparin utilization in angiographic flush solutions.  Various concentrations of heparin in angiographic flush solutions are employed during angiography.  In an effort to determine whether differences in outcome are seen when either high or low concentrations of heparin in angiographic flush solutions are utilized, two groups of patients were evaluated.  There was no difference in outcome and a small systemic effect from heparin was seen in both groups.  Use of a low concentration of heparin is suggested for routine angiography.
Hindbrain ischemia produced by bilateral vertebral artery occlusion and moderate hypotension in spontaneously hypertensive rats.  Hindbrain ischemia was induced by bilateral vertebral artery occlusion and moderate hypotension in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs).  Mean arterial blood pressure was lowered to 80 mmHg in SHRs and to 50 mmHg in Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKYs) by a controlled hemorrhage, and then the vertebral artery was bilaterally occluded through alar foramina of the first cervical vertebra.  Following vertebral occlusion, blood flow of the cerebellum was significantly decreased to 9.4 +/- 2.0 mL/100g/min (+/- SEM) while flow of the cerebrum remained at 32.1 +/- 5.4 in SHRs.  In contrast, cerebellar blood flow in WKYs was preserved at 24.2 +/- 2.9 mL/100g/min.  Brain lactate, pyruvate, and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) were determined in SHRs after sixty minutes of hypotension with or without vertebral occlusion.  Although infratentorial metabolites were actually unaltered in rats with hypotension alone, infratentorial lactate and lactate/pyruvate ratio significantly increased to 14.38 +/- 3.61 mmol/kg and 67.7 +/- 12.1, respectively, with a concomitant decrease in ATP in SHRs with hypotension and vertebral occlusion.  Bilateral vertebral artery occlusion, together with moderate hypotension, was shown to produce a marked reduction of cerebellar blood flow and to induce ischemic metabolic changes in the infratentorial brain in SHRs.
Comparison of standard one-minute treadmill exercise and strandness test (absolute walking distance) in relation to site of lesion, walking distance, and diastolic blood flow velocity (Doppler curves).  In 215 outpatients suffering from occlusive arterial disease of the lower limbs the authors compared the decrease in the ratio of ankle systolic pressure to brachial systolic pressure according to whether the treadmill exercise was limited to one minute or extended until pain forced the patient to stop.  After a one-minute walk the pressure index always decreased significantly, especially when walking was restricted.  The decrease in the pressure index was generally greater when the exercise was continued until the absolute walking distance, and the recovery time was usually twice as long.  The fall in the pressure index was significantly greater for patients with single and multiple iliac stenoses than for those with stenoses at lower levels.  In patients having a diastolic blood flow velocity on Doppler curves at rest, not modified by walking, a maximum drop in peripheral pressure was recorded after walking for one minute.  In this instance there was no intensification of the decrease in peripheral pressure, unlike in patients without a diastolic blood flow velocity at rest.  This one-minute test is not a maximal hemodynamic response, but it is sufficient for the appreciation of ischemia during exercise, according to the different parameters measured.
Coronary artery dissection--a case report.  Coronary artery dissection, both spontaneous and catheter-induced, is associated with a significant morbidity and mortality.  The authors present a case of a middle-aged woman with spontaneous right coronary artery dissection causing inferior wall myocardial infarction and left coronary artery dissection at the time of coronary arteriography.  It is suggested that emergency aortocoronary bypass surgery be performed preceded by insertion of an intra-aortic balloon in acute evolving cases where coronary anatomy is favorable to limit infarction and avert loss of life.
Underestimation of treatment effect in crossover trials.  In crossover trials each subject serves as his own control.  For the study of cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension and angina pectoria, properly designed crossover studies are preferred to parallel studies.  There is a considerable between-subject variability of symptoms in some of these conditions.  Bias due to this is eliminated by the use of a crossover design.  However, a problem is the so-called treatment-by-period interaction.  The present study analyzes the potential influences of this on the outcome of the trial.  Physical carryover effect, defined as a physical effect of the first treatment period carrying on into the second, tends to minimize differences between two consecutive treatment periods.  So does the frustrating experience of an inactive agent in the first treatment period.  Outside influences such as the change of the seasons may affect lengthy crossover trials in a similar way.  The author concludes that the treatment effect in a crossover trial tends to be underestimated.  The current concept that reports of clinical trials are generally biased toward an exaggeration of treatment effects does not seem to apply to crossover trials.
Hemodynamic effects of nebivolol at rest and on exertion in patients with heart failure.  Nebivolol is a novel B-1-adrenoceptor-blocking drug with an unusual hemodynamic profile unlike classical B-blockers.  In dogs and in healthy volunteers it decreases blood pressure and heart rate but improves left ventricular function.  The authors studied 10 male patients with coronary artery disease and heart failure (ejection fraction mean = 46%).  A Swan-Ganz catheter was placed into the pulmonary artery, and the mean blood pressure, the heart rate, the pulmonary artery pressure, the pulmonary wedge pressure, the right atrial pressure, the cardiac output, and the stroke volume were measured at rest and on exertion before and after seven days' treatment with oral nebivolol (5 mg/day).  While the blood pressure and the heart rate decreased significantly, the pulmonary artery and wedge pressures, as well as the right atrial pressure and the cardiac output, did not change during treatment.  The stroke volume increased significantly.  The maintained cardiac output cannot be explained by any changes in preload or afterload; instead a positive inotropic mechanism must be assumed.  Unlike other B-blockers it seems to be possible to treat patients with heart failure with nebivolol without causing the hemodynamic situation to deteriorate.
Effects of diltiazem on the functional recovery of the myocardium at organ and cellular level during prolonged hypothermic ischemic cardiac arrest.  The effectiveness of diltiazem on the functional recovery of the heart, calcium (Ca++) uptake and binding, Ca++ ATPase of cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), and MB fraction of creatine kinase (MBCK) of coronary sinus blood was investigated after one and a half hours of reperfusion following three hours of ischemic cardiac arrest.  The dogs were divided into three groups: group I, sham bypass; group II, cold crystalloid cardioplegia; and group III, cold crystalloid cardioplegia with diltiazem.  There was a decrease in aortic pressures left ventricular pressure development (dp/dt), left ventricular work index (LVWI), total systemic vascular resistance (TSVR), and left ventricular systolic pressure (LVSP) in the sham bypass group.  There was a decrease in cardiac index (CI), LVWI, and mean right atrial pressure (mRAP) and an increase in TSVR and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) in group II as compared with group I.  Although there was a tendency for a decrease in the indices of myocardial contractility in group II, they were not significantly different from those in group I.  The indices of myocardial contractility, CI, and LVWI in group III were slightly higher than in group II, but they were not significantly different from each other.  The values for calcium uptake by SR in groups II and III were similar but significantly lower than those in group I.  Calcium binding in group III was significantly lower than that in group I.  Calcium ATPase of SR in the three groups were similar.  Although MBCK increased in all the groups, the increases were not significantly different among the three groups.  The results of this study indicate that cold crystalloid cardioplegia with diltiazem was not better than cold crystalloid alone in preserving the cardiac contractility and cellular function during prolonged ischemic cardiac arrest.  However, the cardiac function in terms of cardiac index was better preserved with diltiazem.
Successful direct PTCA on LAD after first episode of acute myocardial infarction: does it improve cardiac function?  Patients who received direct percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) after acute mycardial infarction and maintained potency but with unimproved cardiac function were studied.  In 15 patients, the first episode of acute myocardial infarction was caused by a left anterior descending branch lesion; 11 had an ejection fraction of 50% or more in the left ventriculogram in the follow-up period (improved group), and 4 patients had ejection fraction of less than 50% (unimproved group).  There was so significant difference between the groups in the mean time between the onset of infarction and revascularization (improved group, 259.3 +/- 76.9 min; unimproved group, 168.0 +/- 101.6 min) or in the sigma Q.  which was the sum of the Q wave depth of V2, V3, and V4 at the time of admission (improved group, 12.1 +/- 15.6 mm; unimproved group 29.8 +/- 13.4 mm).  The maximum creatine kinase concentration was significantly higher in the unimproved group (improved group 2670 +/- 893 IU/L; unimproved group, 7243 +/- 1928 IU/L, p less than 0.05), and the time taken from the onset to reach its peak was significantly shorter in the unimproved group (improved group, 13.0 +/- 5.1 hr; unimproved group, 6.8 +/- 1.3 hr, p less than 0.05.) These results suggest the probability of sudden deterioration of myocardium, and factors other than microcirculatory thromboembolism should be considered as the cause of unimproved cardiac function after successful direct PTCA.
Intraoperative coronary excimer laser angioplasty: preliminary clinical experience.  Diffuse coronary artery atherosclerosis is generally recognized as a deterrent to successful revascularization if it cannot be adequately treated.  Mechanical endarterectomy can be useful, but it is not the optimal solution owing to the associated higher incidences of perioperative infarction and mortality.  The use of laser energy as an endarterectomy tool appears promising.  To investigate the application of excimer laser radiation to intraoperative coronary artery endarterectomy, 15 stenotic lesions in 13 patients were treated with excimer irradiation during coronary artery bypass grafting.  Eleven (73%) of the lesions were enlarged by the excimer probe (6 of the successes were in calcified lesions).  The 4 arteries not enlarged by the excimer laser all demonstrated calcified lesions.  There were 3 perforations and 2 dissections, all but 1 in heavily calcified arteries.  The results of this phase 1 safety and efficacy study indicate that excimer irradiation can recanalize most arteries, including total and subtotal occlusions and some calcified lesions.  Further evaluation with better delivery systems is needed to determine whether the perforation rate can be reduced.
Intravascular ultrasound: a new potential modality for angioplasty guidance.  Current angioplasty devices are limited by significant rates of arterial perforation and dissection, due to inadequate techniques of guidance, and by restenosis, which may be partly attributed to inadequate debulking of lesions.  This paper describes the authors' initial experience in-vitro and in-vivo with intravascular ultrasound as a possible method of enhancing the three-dimensional guidance of devices through atherosclerotic obstructions.  Using an in-vitro model they correlated the dimensions and histologic morphology of animal and human arteries with ultrasound images of the specimens.  Additional in-vivo evaluations of this technology in canine arteriosclerotic and human atherosclerotic arteries preliminarily support the hypothesis that intravascular ultrasound defines the transmural arterial morphology and may enhance the accuracy of angioplasty procedures.  Simultaneous imaging with angioscopy and intravascular ultrasound is demonstrated as a potential method of accurately defining both intraluminal and transmural arterial wall characteristics.
Improved survival and reduced myocardial necrosis with cardiopulmonary bypass reperfusion in a canine model of coronary occlusion and cardiac arrest.  STUDY QUESTION: Does cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) improve resuscitation rates and limit infarct size after cardiac arrest and acute myocardial infarction? DESIGN: Controlled randomized trial with all animals undergoing left anterior descending coronary artery occlusion and subsequent ventricular fibrillation and resuscitation.  All animals were supported for four hours after resuscitation in an intensive care setting.  INTERVENTION: Group 1 (eight) was resuscitated with standard external CPR and advanced life support.  Group 2 (eight) was resuscitated with CPB.  MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Group hemodynamic, resuscitation variables, number resuscitated, and number of four-hour survivors were compared.  Ischemic and necrotic myocardial weights were determined with histochemical staining techniques in four-hour survivors.  Infarct size was measured as the ratio of necrotic weight to ischemic weight.  Significantly fewer dogs were resuscitated in group 1 (four of eight) than in group 2 (eight of eight) (P less than .05).  Group 2 survivors required significantly less epinephrine and lidocaine than group 1 survivors (P less than .05) and higher aortic diastolic and coronary perfusion pressures after CPB (P less than .001).  The ratio of myocardial necrotic weight to ischemic weight at four hours was 0.82 +/- 0.25 in group 1 and 0.22 +/- 0.25 in group 2 (P less than .05).  However, collateral blood flow was not measured in this study.  CONCLUSION: This pilot study further substantiates the improvement in resuscitation rates obtainable with CPB.  CPB may also limit infarct size during the postresuscitation period and requires further study.
Exercise thallium-201 scintigraphy in the diagnosis and prognosis of coronary artery disease.  OBJECTIVE: To determine the discriminant accuracy of exercise thallium-201 myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and prognosis of patients with known or suspected coronary artery disease.  DATA IDENTIFICATION: A survey of the National Library of Medicine MEDLINE database.  STUDY SELECTION: The key medical subject headings used were coronary disease, myocardial infarction, radionuclide imaging, and thallium.  A total of 122 retrieved studies were considered relevant and were reviewed in depth.  DATA EXTRACTION: Only studies reporting both the sensitivity and specificity of thallium scintigraphy were analyzed.  RESULTS: Discriminant accuracy for diagnosis and prognosis was summarized in terms of pooled sensitivity and specificity.  CONCLUSIONS: Exercise thallium scintigraphy is useful in the noninvasive diagnosis of coronary artery disease, especially in patients with abnormal resting electrocardiograms, restricted exercise tolerance, and intermediate probability of having disease at the time of testing as well as of defining the prognosis of patients with known or suspected coronary artery disease, especially in those with previous myocardial infarction.  Because of various shortcomings in the published record, however, the marginal discriminant accuracy and cost effectiveness of thallium scintigraphy compared with conventional clinical assessment and exercise electrocardiography remain controversial.
Combined internal mammary artery graft for coronary artery revascularization.  Five patients with multiple-vessel coronary artery disease underwent isolated coronary artery bypass grafting with a technique involving both internal mammary arteries and a small piece of interposed saphenous vein.  The combined internal mammary artery grafts were used for sequential grafting.  A total of 20 anastomoses were performed (average number, 4 anastomoses per patient).  There were no operative deaths.  Postoperative complications included reoperation for bleeding in 1 patient and diaphragmatic dysfunction in another.  Postoperative coronary angiography 2 days before discharge (mean time, 10 days postoperatively) revealed that all the sequential anastomoses with the combined IMA graft were patent.  Exercise tolerance tests performed 3 and 11 months postoperatively indicated excellent results and no ischemia.  Based on this experience, we conclude that this method appears promising for multivessel coronary artery bypass grafting.
Long-term amiodarone administration protects against global myocardial ischemia.  Reports on the effects of amiodarone on cardiac function have been variable.  This study addresses the effect of long-term amiodarone administration on recovery of cardiac function after a period of global ischemia.  Normotensive and spontaneously hypertensive rats were used.  Normotensive rats (n = 6) received 240 mg/kg amiodarone for 4 weeks, for a total of 72 +/- 3 mg.  Hypertensive rats (n = 6) received 500 mg/kg amiodarone for 4 weeks, for a total of 116 +/- 5 mg.  Final myocardial concentrations of amiodarone and desethylamiodarone were 1.85 +/- 1.75 and 0.50 +/- 0.61 micrograms/g wet weight for the normotensive rats and 1.30 +/- 0.58 and 0.31 +/- 0.17 micrograms/g for the hypertensive rats (p = nonsignificant).  Equal numbers of controls received sterile saline solution for 4 weeks.  The hearts were excised and perfused in a Langendorff apparatus.  The results indicate that, after 15 minutes of normothermic ischemia, hearts treated with this relatively low dose of amiodarone recovered a greater percentage of preischemic work (97% +/- 13%) as compared with the controls (76% +/- 17%) (p less than 0.005).
Subaortic obstruction: intraoperative echocardiography as an adjunct to operation.  Fourteen patients undergoing operation for subaortic obstruction (membranous obstruction in 11 patients, tunnel obstruction in 2 patients, obstruction due to reduplicated mitral valve tissue in 1 patient) were evaluated by intraoperative epicardial echocardiography.  In all 9 patients with "discrete" obstruction who underwent prebypass epicardial echocardiography, the septal and lateral attachments of the lesion were correctly demonstrated.  The precise extent of tunnel stenosis was seen in both patients.  The lateral attachment of the membrane in 4 patients and multiple extensions in another 2 were identified by the epicardial study (having been missed on precordial echocardiography).  The discrete membrane was enucleated in 10 of the 11 patients and was partially resected in 1.  One tunnel obstruction was completely relieved; the other was partially relieved.  Reduplicated mitral valve tissue in the remaining patient was completely resected.  Epicardial imaging after bypass showed remnants of the membrane in 2 patients.  Intraoperative Doppler echocardiography and color flow imaging confirmed the absence of clinically significant residual gradients (less than 20 mm Hg) in all but 1 patient with tunnel obstruction.  Epicardial imaging provided excellent morphological information about obstructive lesions of the left ventricular outflow tract and enabled immediate assessment of surgical repair.
Use of the variable-length intraluminal sutureless graft.  From August 1987 to May 1988 we treated 4 patients with acute ascending aortic dissections with a variable-length intraluminal aortic prosthesis.  This operation uses profound hypothermic circulatory arrest and represents a refinement of existing techniques.  There was no mortality, and morbidity was minimal.  Modifications of this technique can be used in performing proximal aortic root reconstruction with a composite valved conduit.  The use of a variable-length intraluminal prosthesis and hypothermic circulatory arrest is illustrated.  This is a safe and useful technique in select cases of acute ascending aortic dissection.
Liver transplantation with atrioatrial anastomosis for Budd-Chiari syndrome.  We report the case of a young woman with Budd-Chiari syndrome in whom mesentericoval shunt was first performed, followed by transcaval liver resection and hepatoatrial anatomosis 3 years later.  Liver transplantation became necessary 5 years later because of deterioarating liver function with portal hypertension and bleeding.  Successful transplantation was performed with atrioatrial anastomosis with help of cardiopulmonary bypass, simplifying considerably the technical procedure and reducing dramatically blood loss.
Polytetrafluoroethylene graft for spontaneous coronary dissection: 7-year follow-up.  Spontaneous coronary artery dissection remains an exceedingly rare cause of myocardial ischemia.  The patients are usually young and female, and the dissection is frequently fatal.  The use of polytetrafluoroethylene as an aortocoronary conduit is generally followed by early occlusion.  We report a case of spontaneous right coronary dissection in which a polytetrafluoroethylene graft was placed that was observed to remain patent by angiography at least 72 months after operation.
Improved cannulation method for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.  Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation has been shown to be useful for patients in reversible cardiogenic shock.  Effective arterial cannulation techniques for infants have been developed that are simple to use and require minimal subsequent vascular repair or reconstruction after removal.  Groin cannulation in adults frequently requires bidirectional arterial cannulation to ensure adequate distal perfusion as well as frequent complex arterial repairs after discontinuation.  We describe a simple arterial cannulation technique using a single right-angle, high-flow arterial cannula.  With this technique adequate bidirectional arterial perfusion is maintained with a single arterial cannula while the need for vascular repairs or reconstruction is minimized.
Financial impact of a rapid CK-MB-specific immunoassay on the diagnosis of myocardial infarction.  The purpose of this study was twofold.  First, we evaluated the financial impact of a rapid, monoclonal antibody-based CK-MB mass assay (Stratus, Dade Division, Baxter Laboratories, Miami, Fla) for the direct measurement of CK-MB in serum samples from 65 patients admitted to the coronary care unit with the possible diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction.  Second, we evaluated retrospectively the Stratus assay and an activity assay (electrophoresis) for CK-MB in the following patient categories: acute myocardial infarction treated with and without thrombolytic therapy, angina, congestive heart failure, skeletal muscle trauma, and the acutely ill without acute myocardial infarction.  The advantageous features of the Stratus mass assay were as follows.  First, the laboratory was able to perform the assay more frequently because of the short assay time per specimen (less than 10 minutes) without additional personnel.  This had a substantial impact on the clinician's ability to diagnose acute myocardial infarction and to move patients out of an intensive care unit at substantial financial savings to the patient, the hospital, or the third-party payer.  Second, the Stratus assay was able to detect low levels of CK-MB (1 to 2 micrograms/L) in the presence of low total creatine kinase activity (less than 100 U/L).  Third, the Stratus assay showed no interference due to very-high-total creatine kinase activities (greater than 100,000 U/L), CK-BB, macro-creatine kinase, and mitochondrial creatine kinase.
Angioscopy for intraoperative management of thromboembolectomy.  Our experience with angioscopy suggests that direct visualization of the arterial lumen during thromboembolectomy procedures would provide a more reliable method of assessing luminal morphologic characteristics than angiography alone.  We inspected 32 grafts (seven aortobifemoral, 18 infrainguinal bypass, and seven dialysis access fistula grafts) in 32 patients.  Thirty-one patients had thrombotic events and one patient had an acute embolus.  Angioscopy following standard catheter thrombectomy revealed significant amounts of retained thrombus or neointima in all thrombectomies.  Angioscopic information from 18 patients with an infrainguinal bypass graft led to graft revision in six cases and placement of a new graft in 10 cases.  One graft limb was replaced in seven aortobifemoral grafts, and multiple repeated thrombectomies were employed to extract debris in the remaining six cases.  Repeated graft thrombectomy was also beneficial in dialysis access fistulas.  Angioscopy allowed us to omit the completion angiogram and led to an improved technical result.  We conclude that angioscopy is useful during thromboembolectomy procedures.
Critical care transportation medicine: new concepts in pretransport stabilization of the critically ill patient.  Regionalization of health care for trauma has become commonplace, and the same concept for critically ill medical/surgical patients is developing.  Recent evidence suggests that current stabilization measures used by transport teams can be inadequate for this critically ill patient population.  In trauma, speed has been considered a necessity to get the patient to a facility which cannot be carried out to the field, eg, an operating room.  For acute medical illnesses, critical care transport teams can bring intensive care technology to the patient.  Accumulating evidence supports the premise that speed of transport is not as important as stabilization before transport, knowledge of hemodynamics during transport, and early use of critical care monitoring systems.  Other reports identify the need for initial evaluation and stabilization of critically ill patients by physicians at the critical care level of expertise.  Accordingly, critical care transportation teams have evolved, creating new notions of pretransport stabilization not applicable to previous transport systems.
Ventricular arrhythmias in hypertensive left ventricular hypertrophy. Relationship to coronary artery disease, left ventricular dysfunction, and myocardial fibrosis.  Ventricular arrhythmias occur with increased frequency in hypertensive patients with left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH).  The relationships, however, between ventricular arrhythmias and coexistent coronary artery disease, left ventricular dysfunction and left ventricular fibrosis have not been examined in hypertensive LVH.  We carried out coronary arteriography on fifteen hypertensive patients with LVH and nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (greater than or equal to 3 consecutive ventricular complexes) of whom nine (60%) were free of significant (greater than 50% stenosis) coronary disease.  To identify other possible correlates of left ventricular arrhythmias, 28 patients with LVH, comprising 17 with ventricular tachycardia and 11 without ventricular arrhythmias, underwent quantitative assessment of left ventricular function (angiographic ejection fraction), left ventricular mass (echocardiography), and left ventricular fibrosis (endomyocardial biopsy).  Ejection fraction was not significantly different between the two groups (53 +/- 8% v 62 +/- 2%, P = NS).  However, left ventricular mass was significantly greater (442 +/- 28 g v 339 +/- 34 g, P less than .05) and percentage fibrosis significantly higher (19 +/- 4% v 3 +/- 1%, P less than .001) in those patients with ventricular tachycardia.  Thus ventricular arrhythmias in hypertensive patients with LVH cannot be entirely attributed to coexistent coronary disease, nor to left ventricular dysfunction, but are related to the degree of cardiac hypertrophy and subendocardial fibrosis.
Effects of n-3 fatty acids in essential hypertension.  We examined the effects on blood pressure, plasma lipoproteins, and platelet function when marine oil supplements (rich in n-3 fatty acids) or vegetable oil supplements (rich in n-6 fatty acids) were added to the usual diets of patients with mild essential hypertension.  In a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group study, patients received 50 g of either marine oil (n = 8) or vegetable oil (n = 8) daily for 6 weeks following a baseline observation period.  Diastolic blood pressure declined during treatment with fish oil (mean +/- SEM, 96 +/- 2 v 89 +/- 2 mm Hg, P = .02), but did not change with vegetable oil (92 +/- 1 v 94 +/- 1 mm Hg).  Systolic blood pressure did not change significantly during either treatment.  Serum triglycerides declined (by approximately 30%) in patients receiving only marine oil, but total cholesterol, LDL-, HDL-, HDL2-, and HDL3-cholesterol-subfractions and apolipoproteins A-I and B were unchanged in both treatment groups.  Bleeding time increased by 33% during treatment with marine oil but did not change with vegetable oil supplements.  Marine oil did not alter in vitro platelet aggregation thresholds.  The lack of a significant correlation between blood pressure changes and platelet membrane fluidity, plasma renin activity, aldosterone, norepinephrine, or epinephrine suggests that these variables did not mediate the antihypertensive effect of the marine oil.  We conclude that large doses of marine oil reduce diastolic blood pressure, lower triglycerides, and increase bleeding time in patients with mild hypertension.
Effect of captopril injection in patients with moderate to severe hypertension.  The effect of intravenous captopril was studied in 24 white patients who had moderate to severe hypertension.  Patients received incremental doses of 1 to 10 mg delivered at 10 min intervals over 50 to 80 min.  Blood pressure (BP) was lowered within 5 to 10 min after the initial dose was administered and continued to decline, reaching a maximum response after 20 min (2 to 4 mg).  At this time group mean BP fell from 175 +/- 3/111 +/- 1 to 166 +/- 3/97 +/- 2 mm Hg (P less than 0.01).  Additional dose increments to an average cumulative dose of 40 mg did not increase the initial effect.  No adverse side effects or symptomatic hypotension occurred in any subject.  There was a significant correlation between diastolic BP decreases observed in response to intravenous captopril and subsequent long-term oral captopril therapy.  The addition of hydrochlorothiazide increased the proportion of patients reaching normotension.  We conclude that small intravenous bolus injections of captopril appear to be effective rapidly and are well tolerated in moderate to severe essential hypertension.  Short-term intravenous administration seems to predict the response to chronic oral captopril therapy.
Amiloride blocks the onset of ACTH-induced hypertension in the sheep.  This study investigated the ability of two diuretics, amiloride and frusemide, to prevent the development of ACTH induced hypertension in conscious sheep.  Infusion of amiloride (20 mg/day) or frusemide (50 mg/day) for three days into normotensive sheep did not have any significant effects on blood pressure.  Amiloride blocked ACTH-induced hypertension and the sodium retention and hypokalemia which is usually associated with ACTH administration.  Frusemide failed to completely block the hypertension and potassium loss, however it blocked the transient initial urinary sodium retention associated with ACTH-induced hypertension.  As frusemide failed to completely block the hypertension it is unlikely that the amiloride effect is due primarily to effects on urinary Na excretion.  It is possible that amiloride is exerting its antihypertensive effects by blocking sodium channels.
Randomized trials in the study of antihypertensive drugs.  Heterogeneity in response to antihypertensive drugs can be addressed by randomized trials in individual subjects.  In such a trial a patient receives pairs of treatment periods (one period of each pair active drug, one matched placebo, in random order); patient and clinician are blinded to allocation, and treatment targets are monitored.  These trials can optimize antihypertensive therapy in clinical practice and facilitate the investigation of new drugs and the study of pathophysiology.  Such trials also have potential in helping decide whether common, nonspecific symptoms reported by patients are really drug related.
From the parallel group design to the crossover design, and from the group approach to the individual approach.  The consequences of heterogeneity in response to antihypertensive drugs for the clinical development programs of new antihypertensive drugs and for the care of the individual hypertensive patient have not previously been sufficiently recognized.  They play a role in the inappropriate choice of too-high daily doses of some antihypertensive drugs at the end of extensive international development programs.  They are also implicated in the insufficient control of blood pressure observed in the long-term multicenter trials in hypertension, where some patients have been treated for several years with drugs that were not the most appropriate for their disease and which did not adequately control their blood pressure.  In addition to the parallel group studies, the use of double-blind two-period or multiple period crossover designs can provide valid data for the dose-finding of new antihypertensive drugs and their comparative evaluation.  At the end of the trial, these designs also offer each patient the opportunity to be treated with the right dose of the drug most appropriate for his or her disease.
Humoral factors determining the blood pressure response to converting enzyme inhibition and calcium channel blockade.  Renin and catecholamine levels were determined in patients with mild to moderate hypertension before and after treatment with sustained release diltiazem or captopril and were correlated with the blood pressure response to these antihypertensives.  Eight weeks of treatment with either agent led to equal decreases in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure.  Pretreatment plasma renin activity (PRA) and plasma norepinephrine did not predict the blood pressure response to either agent.  Diltiazem significantly increased both PRA and supine norepinephrine levels.  However, in the diltiazem treated patients, there was no correlation between the change in plasma norepinephrine and the change in systolic or diastolic blood pressure.  In contrast, there was a negative correlation (P less than .05) between the reactive rise in PRA and the decrease in systolic blood pressure.  Thus, the antihypertensive response to a calcium channel blocker may be determined, in part, by the reactive response of pressor systems.
Alarm reaction and serum K+ in hypertensive patients.  The effect of serum K+ of the alarm reaction induced by the participation to an experimental noninvasive study was evaluated in 35 subjects with borderline hypertension and in 18 essential hypertensives.  A group of 44 inpatients undergoing routine blood sampling served as a control.  Serum K+, blood pressure and heart rate were measured before (casual) and after (baseline) 20 min of rest in the recumbent position.  Baseline serum K+ values were significantly higher than casual values in patients participating to the experimental protocol while no change was observed in inpatients undergoing routine blood sampling.  The increase in serum K+ induced by relaxation was significantly related to heart rate decrease (r = 0.73).  After relaxation 75% of patients had an increase in serum K+ with a change greater than 10% in about 35% of patients.  In a subgroup of patients who repeated the same test three times, the alarm reaction was still evident and not reproducible within each patient.  These data suggest that when potassium levels are measured in outpatients undergoing diagnostic or experimental procedures falsely reduced levels can be found in a large proportion of subjects.
Studies of salt intake in hypertension. What can epidemiology teach us?  It has been suggested that small changes in population blood pressure will have a major impact upon the incidence of cardiovascular disease caused by blood pressure elevation.  Early reports indicated a close correlation between intercultural differences in salt intake and blood pressure.  Before such epidemiological associations can be translated into population advice, certain conditions have to be met.  The association has to be validated scientifically, and persuasive evidence has to be produced that the relationship is causal and reversible by changes in salt intake.  Further, risk-benefit analysis should indicate that net harm is unlikely.  Finally it has to be demonstrated that the population measures being advocated will produce an adequate change in dietary salt intake.  The small individual effects upon blood pressure being examined, and the prevailing changes in blood pressure and cardiovascular mortality suggest that data will always fall short of the ideal and therefore that extrapolation will always be necessary.  Nevertheless, a review of the present evidence indicates the inadequacies of the available data as a basis for population advice.
Calcium and blood pressure. An epidemiologic perspective.  We reviewed the research literature on the epidemiologic relationship between blood pressure levels and calcium, with an emphasis on dietary intake.  A conceptual framework for causal inference is summarized; then the designs and results of observational and intervention studies are presented.  Of 25 reports of observational studies relating intake of calcium or calcium-rich foods to blood pressure, the majority found some evidence of an inverse association.  However, many analyses did not support this relationship, and only two studies have confirmed the inverse association with a prospective design.  Nineteen randomized controlled clinical trials of calcium supplementation have been reported, excluding those exclusively in pregnant women.  Eleven of these showed no significant effects on blood pressure; in two trials, both systolic and diastolic pressure were significantly reduced; and in the remainder results were equivocal.  Pooled analyses yielded estimates of a small (1.8 mm Hg), significant reduction in systolic blood pressure, but no effect on diastolic pressure.  Epidemiologic relationships with serum and urinary calcium, and the possible mechanisms of these effects, are also discussed.  We conclude that the evidence from studies in humans is suggestive, but not conclusive, regarding a role for calcium in hypertension.  Recommendations for further epidemiologic studies are presented.
Blood pressure response to dietary calcium intervention in humans.  Epidemiological and experimental studies have suggested that dietary calcium deficiency may lead to the development of hypertension.  This article reviews findings in human trials on calcium intervention with special reference to the responses of blood pressure and biochemical variables.  Calcium supplementation consistently resulted in decreased blood pressure in a subset of hypertensive and normotensive subjects, but led to increased blood pressure in some hypertensive patients.  The variable blood pressure responses to calcium supplementation could not be predicted on the basis of routine biochemical parameters and appeared to be due to differences in the backgrounds of the subjects and/or the design and size of the trials.  It is concluded that further studies are required on the hypotensive effect of calcium supplementation.
Sodium-calcium interactions and salt-sensitive hypertension.  In humans with essential hypertension, salt-induced increases in blood pressure have been reported to correlate directly with salt-induced increases in intracellular free calcium [( Ca2+]i) in circulating mononuclear cells.  These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that salt-induced increases in [Ca2+]i mediate the phenomenon of salt sensitivity.  Circumstantial evidence suggests that salt-induced increases in intracellular sodium or in plasma levels of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D might mediate salt-induced increases in [Ca2+]i and blood pressure.  However, in humans with salt-sensitive hypertension, it remains to be determined: (1) whether salt-induced increases in white blood cell [Ca2+]i reflect corresponding increases in vascular smooth muscle [Ca2+]i; (2) whether salt-induced increases in [Ca2+]i are a cause or consequence of salt-induced increases in blood pressure; and (3) whether salt-induced increases in 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D or intracellular sodium precede salt-induced increases in [Ca2+]i.
Putative mechanism of blood pressure reduction induced by increases in dietary calcium intake.  An increase in dietary calcium intake lowers blood pressure in spontaneously hypertensive rats and in some patients with arterial hypertension.  The mechanisms by which this decrease come about are not clear.  A membrane-stabilizing effect wrought by an increase in extracellular calcium would appear unlikely, since the increases in extracellular calcium concentration with increased dietary intake are minimal.  Calcium regulatory hormones may be the mediators, and a cybernetic framework has been suggested.  Striking defects have been reported in the calcium handling and hormonal household of the spontaneously hypertensive rat.  However, a clear cut relationship in terms of a hormonal "template" has not yet been identified in prospective experiments.  Data have been presented to show that increased calcium intake has a direct effect on regulatory areas in the brain.  However, the mechanisms by which such a response would be mediated are entirely unknown.  Increased calcium intake may induce natriuresis.  It has been suggested that increased calcium intake helps the "salt sensitive"; however, prospective studies to this effect have not been presented.  Increased calcium intake may induce phosphaturia.  However, the evidence that blood pressure lowering effects are mediated by phosphate depletion are unconvincing.  Some evidence suggests that increased calcium intake may influence local regulatory processes which in turn influences cell integrity and growth.  At this point, a unifying hypothesis is not available.  However, the clues to various possibilities are intriguing.
Calcium regulating hormones in essential hypertension. Importance of gender.  Alterations of calcium metabolism have been described in human essential hypertension and experimental hypertension.  We investigated the interrelationship of parathyroid hormone (PTH) and 1,25(OH)2-vitamin D (1,25(OH)2D) in patients with untreated essential hypertension as compared to normotensive controls.  The hypertensive subjects (n = 75; 43 men, 32 women) had a mean blood pressure of 138 +/- 8/95 +/- 5 mm Hg as compared with 120 +/- 11/80 +/- 8 in the normotensive group (n = 40; 22 men, 18 women).  Serum PTH was measured with an intact molecule immunochemiluminometric assay and 1,25(OH)2D was measured with radioimmunoassay after HPLC separation.  Hypertensive men had PTH levels that were 36% higher than normotensive men (5.3 +/- 2.9 v 3.9 +/- 0.8 pmol/L, P = .005).  When blood pressure was analyzed as a continuous variable, there was a direct correlation between it and serum PTH in men (r = .31, P = .004).  In women, by contrast, there was no difference in serum PTH between hypertensive and normotensive subjects and no relationship between blood pressure and the serum PTH concentration.  Blood pressure was inversely correlated with serum phosphorus levels in both sexes (r = -0.20, P = .04).  In men, the elevated serum PTH levels and depressed serum phosphorus levels would have predicted that serum 1,25(OH)2D would be higher in the hypertensive subjects.  However, that was not observed, as serum 1,25(OH)2D was slightly lower in hypertensive (38.3 +/- 15.2 pg/mL) than normotensive men (42.7 +/- 11.3, P = .21).
Calciotropic hormones in human and experimental hypertension.  Although altered cellular calcium handling plays a critical role in the pathophysiology of hypertension, little attention has been focused on the impact of calcium regulating hormones on this process.  Recent research provides evidence that parathyroid hormone, calcitonin, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, as well as newly described factors such as calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), exert target-organ-specific actions in cardiac and peripheral vascular tissues, are linked to the renin-aldosterone system, and thus to the control of sodium metabolism, and may directly participate in the hypertensive process, especially in low renin and salt sensitive forms of hypertensive disease.  The metabolic set-point of these linked renin and calcium hormone systems, which serve to transduce environmental dietary mineral signals at the cellular level, determines the blood pressure consequences of sodium and calcium loading and/or restriction, and helps to explain the heterogeneous and seemingly inconsistent effects of these dietary maneuvers on blood pressure.  Measurement of renin and calcium factors in hypertension thus provides a physiological basis for individualized therapeutic recommendations in human hypertension.
Dietary Ca2+ prevents NaCl-sensitive hypertension in spontaneously hypertensive rats by a sympatholytic mechanism.  The current study tested the hypothesis that dietary Ca2+ supplementation reverses the NaCl-sensitive component of hypertension and the associated neurochemical abnormalities in the NaCl-sensitive spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR-S).  Male SHR-S were begun on one of four diets at 8 weeks of age: control (0.75% NaCl/0.68% Ca2+); high NaCl (8.00% NaCl/0.68% Ca2+); high Ca2+ (0.75% NaCl/2.00% Ca2+); and high NaCl/high Ca2+ (8.00% NaCl/2.00% Ca2+).  High NaCl SHR-S (X2 weeks) had higher mean arterial pressure (MAP) (161 +/- 4 mm Hg) than controls (149 +/- 3 mm Hg; P less than .05).  Supplementation with Ca2+ prevented the rise in MAP in high NaCl rats, but did not alter MAP in controls.  The 8% NaCl diet elevated plasma norepinephrine and reduced anterior hypothalamic (AHA) norepinephrine stores and turnover; concomitant Ca2+ supplementation restored both plasma norepinephrine and AHA norepinephrine turnover to normal.  Clonidine was microinjected into the AHA of rats maintained on the four diets for 2 weeks to test the hypothesis that dietary Ca2+ supplementation prevents the previously observed NaCl-induced upregulation of alpha 2-adrenoceptors in AHA.  Clonidine caused dose-dependent decreases in MAP that were greater in high NaCl rats than in controls.  The Ca2+ supplementation prevented the exaggerated depressor response to clonidine in the high NaCl group, but not in the controls.  The Ca2+ supplementation had no effect on pretreatment MAP or on MAP responses to clonidine in control NaCl-resistant SHR (SHR-R) or Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats.  Thus, dietary Ca2+ supplementation prevents the NaCl-induced exacerbation of hypertension and augmented depressor response to clonidine in SHR-S by increasing noradrenergic input to AHA, thereby preventing the upregulation of AHA alpha 2-adrenoceptors.
Vascular and calcemic effects of plasma of spontaneously hypertensive rats.  Circulating substances that increase intracellular calcium, and other circulating substances that increase blood pressure, have been described in hypertensive animals and humans.  In this study, we report the existence of a factor of the plasma of spontaneously hypertensive rats that does both.  These effects were dose-dependent, and the time course for such effects was correlated with the time course for potentiation of pressor agents by the plasma.  In addition, the plasma of spontaneously hypertensive rats was found to inhibit the depressor effects of parathyroid hormone.  Our results confirm the presence of a circulating hypertensive factor in the plasma of spontaneously hypertensive rats, which may act by increasing calcium uptake in vascular smooth muscle.  These findings may also help explain the secondary increase in parathyroid hormone noted in some forms of human and experimental hypertension.
Epithelial abnormalities in intestine and kidney of the spontaneously hypertensive rat.  A variety of perturbations of calcium metabolism are reported to occur in the spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) compared to its genetic control the Wistar-Kyoto rat (WKY), including significant dysfunction of calcium handling by the proximal renal tubule of the SHR, resulting in impaired active calcium transport in the gut and an apparent renal calcium leak.  We explored the intestinal and renal epithelia of 12- to 14-week-old SHR and WKY using electron microscopy.  Biochemical comparisons of these transport epithelia included measurements of three vitamin D dependent cellular proteins and one structural protein: alkaline phosphatase, intestinal CaBP9K, renal CaBP28K, and villin expression.  Electron microscopy demonstrated a patchy loss in microvilli in the SHR, accounting for approximately 10 to 15% of the total microvillar surface.  In the kidney, morphological abnormalities were observed only in the proximal renal tubule.  Again, there was patchy loss of microvilli from the brush border membrane.  In SHR duodenal alkaline phosphatase activity was significantly reduced compared to the WKY (0.145 +/- 0.002 v 0.186 +/- 0.002 integrated extinction/min/micron 3 X 10(3) brush border (P less than .001).  Duodenal CaBP9K and renal CaBP28K were significantly reduced in SHR compared to WKY.  There were no differences in villin expression.  These data are consistent with the previously characterized disturbances of active calcium transport in the intestine and inappropriate renal calcium leak in the SHR.  While a possible link between these disturbances and hypertension remains to be determined, this study provides supportive evidence for a primary disturbance in cell calcium handling and transporting epithelia in this form of genetic hypertension.
Possible mechanisms of abnormal norepinephrine sensitivity and reactivity of resistance vessels and the development of hypertension in spontaneously hypertensive rats. A hypothesis.  This study examined structural and functional changes of mesenteric resistance vessels in early, developing, and established stages of hypertension development in spontaneously hypertensive rats in an attempt to identify possible mechanisms of the development and maintenance of hypertension.  Our results suggest that the development of hypertension in spontaneously hypertensive rats may be caused by genetic structural and functional abnormalities of resistance vessels.  Both abnormalities may be caused by hyperreactivity to norepinephrine through an altered signal transduction process, including the regulation of protein kinase C in smooth muscle cells of resistance vessels in spontaneously hypertensive rats.
Contribution of calmodulin and protein kinase C to renin release in spontaneously hypertensive rats.  This study was designed to evaluate the contribution of calmodulin and protein kinase C to renin release from isolated glomeruli of spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR, Okamoto and Aoki).  Male 7-week-old SHR and age-matched control Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY) were used in this study.  Isolated glomeruli were sealed in the superfusion chamber and perfused with Krebs-Ringer solution at a constant flow of 0.3 mL/min.  Renin release was increased by calmodulin inhibitor, W-7, and protein kinase C inhibitor, H-7, in both SHR and WKY.  SHR showed higher maximal levels of renin release by W-7 and lower maximal levels by H-7 compared to WKY.  These results indicate that calmodulin and protein kinase C play inhibitory roles in renin release from juxtaglomerular cells.  The calmodulin-mediated suppression mechanism in renin release appears to be augmented in the SHR, whereas the protein kinase C-mediated system is attenuated.
Increase of calmodulin activator in hypertension. Modulation by dietary sodium and calcium.  The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of dietary calcium and sodium on blood pressure (BP) in normotensive rats (Wistar, WKY), spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and Dahl rats and on calmodulin (CaM) activator, a newly-discovered hydrophobic compound that increases CaM activity in SHR and spontaneously hypertensive mice (SHM) tissues (J Clin Invest 82:276, 1988).  The CaM activator was assessed by its capacity to stimulate a CaM-dependent phosphodiesterase (CaM-PDE).  In Wistar rats, which were fed a high sodium diet (3.5%), BP significantly increased (P less than .01) from 106 +/- 4 to 128 +/- 8 mm Hg in parallel to an elevation of the CaM activator from 1.57 +/- 0.14 to 2.80 +/- 0.18 U.  WKY, SHR, and Dahl salt-sensitive (DS/JR) and salt-resistant (DR/JR) rats were given low (0.15%) or high (2.5%) Ca diets, both with 1% sodium.  In rats receiving high dietary Ca the progression of hypertension diminished and BP was lower in SHR (156 +/- 4 mm Hg) and young DS/JR rats (125 +/- 3 mm Hg) than in those receiving low dietary Ca (192 +/- 10 and 183 +/- 2 mm Hg).  There was a concomitant decrease of CaM activator in these animals to levels indistinguishable from those of WKY or DR/JR rats.  The activator was also found in the heart, kidneys and erythrocytes from SHM.  In the presence of exogenously added CaM, lipidic extracts from the SHM heart showed augmented CaM-PDE activity relative to normotensive preparations.  This difference was eliminated by trifluoperazine.
Responses of cytosolic free calcium to ADP in platelets of spontaneously hypertensive rats.  Abnormalities of Ca2+ handling have been reported in patients with essential hypertension and in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR).  In this study, responses of cytosolic Ca2+ to ADP in platelets of SHR were examined.  Four- and seven-week-old male SHR and age- and sex-matched Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY) were used.  Basal levels of the intracellular Ca2+ concentration in platelets and responses to ADP were estimated using fluorescent indicator fura-2 in the medium containing 1 mmol/L CaCl2 and Ca2(+)-free buffer with 1 mmol/L EGTA.  Basal levels of platelet cytosolic Ca2+ of SHR were significantly higher than those of WKY at 4 and 7 weeks of age in the presence of external Ca2+.  However, no significant difference was observed in basal levels of platelet cytosolic Ca2+ in the Ca2(+)-free EGTA-containing buffer between SHR and WKY.  The peak cytosolic Ca2+ concentration evoked by ADP was significantly diminished in SHR compared with WKY in the absence of external Ca2+, whereas the responses of platelet cytosolic Ca2+ to ADP were similar in SHR and WKY in the presence of external Ca2+.  These results suggest that release from intracellular Ca2+ store is reduced in SHR and that the regulation of cytosolic Ca2+ in SHR is more dependent on extracellular Ca2+ compared with WKY.
Calcium and contractile responses to phorbol esters and the calcium channel agonist, Bay K 8644, in arteries from hypertensive rats.  This study examined the calcium dependency of contractions in arteries from rats made hypertensive by aortic coarctation and in rats with genetic hypertensive (stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats).  Mesenteric artery and aortic strips were suspended in tissue baths for isometric force recording and contractions to two drugs were characterized: 1) a phorbol ester, TPA (12-O-tetrade-canoylphorbol-13-acetate), and 2) the calcium channel agonist, Bay K 8644.  Thoracic aortae and mesenteric arteries from hypertensive rats were more sensitive to the contractile properties of the protein kinase C activator TPA than comparable arteries from normotensive rats.  In thoracic aortae from coarcted rats, the contractile activity of Bay K 8644 was potentiated compared to normotensive values.  In the presence of 19.2 mmol/L KCl, responses to Bay K 8644 in thoracic aortae from normotensive rats were potentiated and did not differ from coarcted values.  In contrast, contractions to Bay K 8644 and TPA in abdominal aortae obtained below the coarctation were not different from normotensive values.  Upon exposure to 26.2 mmol/L KCl, contractions to Bay K 8644 in abdominal aortae were potentiated and those in aortae from coarcted rats did not differ from sham values.  Contractile responses to both drugs were blocked by nifedipine and verapamil and responses were attenuated in calcium-free solution.  We conclude that calcium channel function and its regulation by protein kinase C contribute to altered vascular reactivity in hypertension.  Further, these abnormalities have a pressure dependency, because they did not occur in abdominal aortae from coarcted rats.
Age-related changes in membrane fluidity of erythrocytes in essential hypertension.  In the present study, age- and calcium-related changes in the membrane fluidity of erythrocytes were examined in patients with essential hypertension by use of electron spin resonance method (ESR).  The erythrocytes were obtained from patients with essential hypertension.  We examined the ESR spectra for a fatty acid spin label agent (5-nitroxy stearate) incorporated into the erythrocyte membranes.  The values of outer hyperfine splitting and order parameter (S) were significantly higher in subjects with essential hypertension than in the normotensive subjects.  This finding indicates that the membrane fluidity of erythrocytes was lower in essential hypertension.  Calcium-loading of erythrocytes with the Ca-ionophore A23187 decreased the membrane fluidity (S value was increased) more strongly in essential hypertension than in the normotensive subjects.  Furthermore, this Ca-induced change in membrane fluidity was significantly correlated with age in essential hypertension.  These results demonstrate that the membrane fluidity of erythrocytes is markedly decreased by calcium, especially in essential hypertension in older patients.  This suggests an increased calcium-sensitivity of cell membranes in the aged hypertensive patient.
Post-transplant hypertension.  Post-transplant hypertension remains an important risk factor for cardiovascular mortality and graft function.  There are multiple mechanisms responsible for post-transplant hypertension.  The details of these mechanisms are poorly understood.  Steroids, acute and chronic rejection, recurrent renal disease, native kidney disease, and renal artery stenosis have all been implicated in causing post-transplant hypertension.  With the addition of cyclosporine, a known hypertensive agent, to the immunosuppressive armamentarium, the evaluation of post-transplantation hypertension has become difficult.  Presently, medical therapy is initially directed toward the complications of cyclosporine nephrotoxicity.  Empirically, converting enzyme inhibitors are added to the antihypertensive regimen.  Further management is aimed at identification of specific causes of post-transplant hypertension.  Unfortunately, because of the multifactorial etiology of post-transplant hypertension and a lack of detailed information about the mechanisms, medical and surgical therapy are often unrewarding.  Further study is needed to clarify the mechanisms involved in post-transplant hypertension, and thus direct therapy.
Does blood rheology revert to normal after myocardial infarction?  After myocardial infarction there is an acute deterioration of the flow properties of blood.  The present study was designed to test whether the abnormality persists.  Blood and plasma viscosity, red cell aggregation and deformability, haematocrit, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, white cell count, cholesterol, and triglycerides were measured in 51 patients who had had a myocardial infarction 5.4 (mean) years before.  Results in patients and controls were compared and matched pairs with identical cardiovascular risk factors were also selected.  Blood viscosity and red cell aggregation were increased and red cell deformability was decreased in the 51 patients.  The abnormalities were independent of the interval since infarction and persisted for years.  The rheological abnormalities present after myocardial infarction are at least partly independent of the acute event and acute phase reactions.  They contribute to the reduced perfusion of the microcirculation of the heart.
Prospective evaluation of a protocol for induction of sustained ventricular tachycardia in patients referred to a tertiary centre.  All eight stages of a stimulation protocol that used one then two extrastimuli from the right ventricular apex in sinus rhythm and three ventricular drive rates (100, 120, and 140 beats/min) were performed in 24 patients with recurrent spontaneous sustained ventricular tachycardia despite drug treatment.  Twenty two of the patients had sustained a previous myocardial infarct and 18 were on long term treatment with amiodarone.  Sustained (greater than 30 s) ventricular tachycardia was induced in all patients.  Two extrastimuli were significantly more likely to induce sustained ventricular tachycardia than one extrastimulus, both overall and individually for the three ventricular drive rates.  A ventricular drive rate of 140 beats/min was significantly more likely to induce ventricular tachycardia than ventricular drive rates of 100 and 120 beats/min which were significantly more effective than sinus rhythm.  A ventricular drive rate of 140 beats/min with one or two extrastimuli induced ventricular tachycardia in 23/24 (95%) of the patients in this study.  The full eight stage protocol was progressive separately for both extrastimuli and ventricular drive rate but the last two stages (ventricular drive rate of 140 beats/min with one or two extrastimuli) were as effective as the entire protocol in inducing ventricular tachycardia.
Use of computed tomographic scanning and aortography in the diagnosis of acute dissection of the thoracic aorta.  Before the introduction of computed tomographic (CT) scanning, aortography was the investigation of choice for acute aortic dissection.  Between 1978 and 1982, 24 patients were referred to the Brompton Hospital with suspected acute thoracic aortic dissection; all had aortography with diagnosis confirmed at surgery (n = 12) or necropsy (n = 2) or supported by clinical outcome (n = 8).  One patient in whom aortography was negative had type B dissection at necropsy and another patient was lost to follow up.  CT scanning became available in this unit in 1983 and between 1983 and 1987 was used as the only imaging investigation in 32 patients with suspected acute dissection of the thoracic aorta while in a further 22 patients aortography was used alone.  Results were confirmed at surgery (n = 18), necropsy (n = 3), or supported by clinical outcome (n = 31).  Two patients were lost to follow up.  In an additional 16 patients both aortography and CT scanning were performed with concordant findings in 10.  In six in whom the results were discordant, aortography was normal in three in whom subsequent CT scanning showed type B dissection and CT scanning was normal in three patients in whom aortography showed type A dissection.  Both CT scanning and aortography are reliable techniques for assessment of suspected acute dissection of the thoracic aorta.  Both techniques misdiagnose occasionally and the frequency of misdiagnosis will be minimised by performing both investigations in patients where the level of clinical suspicion is high and the initial investigation negative.  CT scanning tends to miss type A dissection and in view of the success of surgery in this condition this failing has the more serious clinical consequences.
Transoesophageal echocardiography in the longitudinal axis: correlation between anatomy and images and its clinical implications.  Transoesophageal echocardiographic imaging in the longitudinal axis is a recent addition to the non-invasive evaluation of congenital and acquired heart disease.  The technique provides unique images of intracardiac anatomy but their interpretation remains difficult.  A heart specimen was therefore cut according to the echocardiographic imaging planes to elucidate the morphological details.  The results suggested that longitudinal transoesophageal imaging complements the transverse axis approach.  It gave new imaging information on the right ventricular outflow tract and the pulmonary trunk, the atrioventricular valves, the interventricular septum, the cardiac apex, and the thoracic aorta.  In particular, it showed the entire length of the right ventricular outflow tract.  When longitudinal imaging was used in combination with transverse imaging almost all the thoracic aorta could be examined.  Imaging in the longitudinal axis may also allow better assessment of the mechanisms of atrioventricular valve regurgitation.
Haemostatic changes during continuous oestradiol-progestogen treatment of postmenopausal women.  To identify changes in haemostatic balance during continuous oestradiol-progestogen treatment, 60 postmenopausal women with climacteric complaints, mean age 55.4 years (range 44-68) were randomly allocated to receive one of four hormone replacement regimens for one year.  All four formulations were administered daily and continuously, each contained 2 mg of 17 beta-oestradiol in combination with either norethisterone acetate, 1 mg (group A) or 0.5 mg (group B) or megestrol acetate, 5 mg (group C) or 2.5 mg (group D).  No significant changes occurred during treatment within or between the groups in platelet count, fibrinogen and 2-antiplasmin.  Activated partial thromboplastin time was shortened (P less than 0.05) in group D and a decline in factor VII activity and antigen (P less than 0.001) and in ATIII activity (P less than 0.05) was noted in group A.  Protein C tended to decline in all treatment groups but statistically significant changes were noted only in groups A and C.  Two women developed crural thrombosis during the observation period.
Haemorheological changes in patients with retinal vein occlusion after isovolaemic haemodilution.  In 83 patients with central retinal vein occlusion and branch vein occlusion we measured the haematocrit (HCT), plasma viscosity (PV), red cell aggregation (RCA), red cell filterability (RCF) and apparent whole blood viscosity (WBV).  A control group (n = 41) was matched for sex, age, and cardiovascular risk factors.  Measurements were performed before and after treatment with isovolaemic haemodilution (IHD).  We found no significant differences between patients with retinal vein occlusion (RVO) and control subjects in haematocrit, plasma viscosity, red cell aggregation, and red cell filterability and no increased whole blood viscosity in the patient group.  Patients with ischaemic retinal vein occlusion and non-ischaemic retinal vein occlusion did not show different haemorheological parameters either.  After treatment with haemodilution, only the haematocrit and whole blood viscosity were significantly decreased, and there were no changes in plasma viscosity, red cell aggregation or red cell filterability.
Pulse oximetry: a new non-invasive assessment of peripheral arterial occlusive disease.  Peripheral skin perfusion reflects the level of vascularity and viability of a limb and may help in planning the site of amputation or bypass surgery in patients with vascular disease.  This study used peripheral pulse oximetry in 20 healthy volunteers and in 20 patients with limb ischaemia.  Pulse oximetry saturation levels (Psa,O2) were compared with ankle artery Doppler pressures and transcutaneous oxygen measurements (Ptc,O2).  Recordings were taken at two standard sites distally and referenced to finger and forearm to calculate an index.  A significant correlation was found between Ptc,O2 and Psa,O2 in patients with ischaemia (r = 0.68, P less than 0.01).  A further group of 12 patients with acute limb ischaemia was similarly assessed before and after revascularization.  After revascularization mean(s.d.) Ptc,O2 increased from 38(13) to 44(1) mmHg (P greater than 0.05) and mean(s.d.) Psa,O2 increased from 86(3) to 90(4) per cent (P less than 0.01).  These data suggest that pulse oximetry is a more sensitive index of peripheral perfusion than Ptc,O2 or ankle artery Doppler pressure and that, because of its accuracy and simplicity, it merits further use.
Recent changes in the treatment of aortoiliac occlusive disease by the Oxford Regional Vascular Service.  Over the four years from 1 January 1985 to 31 December 1988, 192 patients were treated for aortoiliac occlusive disease by the Oxford Regional Vascular Service.  The number of patients treated by percutaneous transluminal angioplasty increased from two in the first year of the study to 34 in the third year of the study.  This increase was accompanied by a decrease in the proportion of patients treated by aortobifemoral bypass but the proportion of patients treated by extra-anatomic bypass remained constant at around 30 per cent.  Twice as many patients were treated in the fourth year as in the first year of the study so that the number of surgical operations increased despite many patients being treated exclusively by percutaneous transluminal angioplasty.  The number of patients requiring mandatory treatment for limb salvage increased by 109 per cent and optional treatment for intermittent claudication by 85 per cent.  The introduction of percutaneous transluminal angioplasty in Oxford has coincided with an increase in the number of patients presenting with symptomatic aortoiliac occlusive disease and has allowed twice as many people to be treated while the number of aortobifemoral bypass operations has remained unchanged.  It is concluded that the introduction of percutaneous transluminal angioplasty has not only generated its own workload but has also led to an increased demand for surgical reconstruction for aortoiliac occlusive disease.
Conservative management of asymptomatic popliteal aneurysm.  Historical review shows that the treatment of popliteal aneurysm has developed by trial and error and there is disagreement about the proper management of the symptomless patient.  In 1981 a policy of conservative management for asymptomatic popliteal aneurysm was adopted in this unit.  Since that time we have also managed nine patients with thrombosed popliteal aneurysms by arteriography and low-dose intra-arterial streptokinase.  Six patients treated within 72 h of occlusion achieved significant (70-100 per cent) lysis, but streptokinase was ineffective in those treated 10 or more days after the thrombosis.  Of the six patients with significant lysis, three were treated by elective reconstruction and two by anticoagulation.  One patient who had significant lysis died.  Vascular patency of all five successfully treated limbs was maintained and no limb loss occurred in those who presented late and failed to achieve significant lysis.  These results reinforce the view that thrombolysis is the treatment of choice for thrombosed popliteal aneurysms.  The low complication rate for asymptomatic popliteal aneurysms and the advent of safe, effective thrombolysis indicate that operation for symptomless popliteal aneurysm is no longer required.
Angioplasty of occluded coronary arteries: use of thin shaft balloon over-the-wire system without pre-dilatation.  A retrospective review was done on 13 consecutive patients who underwent PTCA of totally occluded coronary arteries using a recently released thin shaft balloon over-the-wire angioplasty system.  Balloon size was determined by the closest fit to the arterial size and used without predilatation techniques.  This technique was initially successful in 12 patients with only 2 clinically insignificant episodes of distal embolization and one probable early reclosure.  Using thin shaft angioplasty systems, balloon dilatation of totally occluded coronary arteries can be done safely with a single balloon in many cases resulting in simplified procedures and economic benefits.
Probe angioplasty of total coronary occlusion using the Probing Catheter technique.  Coronary angioplasty (PTCA) of total coronary occlusion is limited by the inability of guidewires and conventional dilating catheters to cross all such lesions.  A new technique was therefore prospectively evaluated for PTCA of these lesions using the ultra-low-profile Probe "balloon on a wire" device.  An intracoronary Probing Catheter was used to facilitate crossing the stenosis with a guidewire and then to deliver a Probe into the obstruction for balloon dilatation.  This technique was utilized in 64 consecutive patients with "absolute" coronary occlusions demonstrating no angiographically detectable antegrade coronary flow.  Successful dilatation was achieved in 47 (73%).  Among 33 occlusions of less than 3 mo duration 31 (94%) were successfully dilated whereas only 16 of 31 more chronic occlusions were dilated (P less than .01).  Chronic occlusions with a tapered morphology and those located more than 1 cm from a branch point were more frequently dilatable.  There were no serious complications including no vessel perforations with this technique.  The Probing Catheter technique offers a safe and effective method for the dilatation of recent coronary occlusions by using balloon on a wire technology.
Regression of infundibular pulmonary stenosis after successful balloon pulmonary valvuloplasty in adults.  Between July 1985 and March 1988, 22 adult patients with congenital pulmonary stenosis underwent balloon pulmonary valvuloplasty.  There were 10 males and 12 females aged 16-45 (average 25 +/- 9.9) years.  All patients had additional mild to severe infundibular stenosis; 16 were restudied 6-36 (mean 12.6) months later by repeat catheterization.  Student's t-test was used for comparison of data.  Right ventricular (RV) systolic pressure before dilatation was 84-196 (mean 129 +/- 32.3) mm Hg, and the peak pulmonary gradient (PPG) was 60-176 (mean 111 +/- 33.2) mm Hg immediately after dilatation.  The RV systolic pressure dropped to 32-140 (mean 59.2 +/- 27) (P less than 0.001); and PPG dropped to 10-113 (mean 37.8 +/- 26.4) (P less than 0.001), and the infundibular gradient ranged from 8 to 113 (mean 35.1 +/- 25.8) mm Hg.  The infundibular diameter, before dilatation, ranged from 2 to 15 (mean 9.5 +/- 4) mm Hg.  At repeat catheterization, the RV systolic pressure dropped further to 33-66 (mean 42.8 +/- 9.7) mm Hg and the PPG was reduced to 0-48 (mean 18.4 +/- 10.9) mm Hg (P less than 0.001).  The infundibular gradient regressed to 0-34 (mean 15 +/- 8.8) mm Hg (P less than 0.001).  The infundibular diameter increased to 8-25 (mean 15.8 +/- 5.4) (P less than 0.001).  It is concluded that moderate to severe infundibular stenosis, in adults, can regress after successful pulmonary valvuloplasty.
Diagnosis of left atrial thrombi in mitral valve disease by coronary arteriography.  Arteriographic findings of neovascularity and fistula formation between coronary arteries and left atrium have occasionally been described in association with left atrial thrombosis in patients with mitral valve disease.  The validity of these coronary arteriographic findings in diagnosis of atrial thrombi has been evaluated in 112 patients with mitral valve disease.  Comparison was made with surgery.  The study furnished these diagnostic values: sensitivity 70%, specificity 85%, positive predictive value 72%.  Even if this angiographic finding is complementary in diagnosis of atrial thrombosis, its identification during coronary arteriography in patients with mitral valve disease is useful.  Its detection could improve diagnostic prediction of thrombosis, especially in patients without previous embolic events or where echocardiography failed to reveal thrombi.
Balloon rupture due to lesion morphology during coronary angioplasty.  We report a case of coronary angioplasty of a left anterior descending artery lesion that was complicated by the rupture of three successive balloon catheters.  Each rupture occurred as a pinhole jet of contrast into a diagonal side branch, causing subintimal staining.  This case demonstrates that balloon rupture may result from lesion morphology.
Severe mitral insufficiency post-balloon valvuloplasty: the late changes found in a disrupted mitral valve.  The case of a 45-yr-old woman who had balloon valvuloplasty for rheumatic mitral stenosis is presented.  An anterior mitral leaflet tear occurred as a complication of the procedure.  Both partial healing of the anterior mitral leaflet and gradual dilatation of the left atrium occurred which allowed the damaged valve to remain in situ for several months.  Some of the late changes which occur after such a complicated valvuloplasty are illustrated here, as this patient eventually required surgery and valve excision for definitive repair.
Inflation pressure requirements during coronary angioplasty.  To examine the balloon inflation pressures required for successful percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA), the maximal inflation pressure required for 477 coronary lesions in 200 consecutive patients was determined retrospectively.  When graded balloon inflations just sufficient to achieve full expansion were used, the maximal inflation pressure used was less than or equal to 8 atm in 412 stenoses (86%) and was less than or equal to 10 atm in 463 stenoses (97%).  Successful PTCA was achieved in 98% of lesions with a 3.5% major procedural complication rate.  In a second group of 100 patients studied prospectively, the inflation pressure required to achieve full balloon expansion was less than or equal to 8 atm in 214 of 232 stenoses (92%) and less than or equal to 10 atm in 228 stenoses (98%).  Thus, PTCA of coronary stenoses can be achieved with high success rates and low complication rates when graded inflations to pressures just sufficient to achieve full balloon expansion are performed.  Most coronary stenoses will respond to pressures less than or equal to 8-10 atm.
Percutaneous popliteal approach for angioplasty of superficial femoral artery occlusions.  Angioplasty using the percutaneous popliteal approach was utilized in 50 patients (PTS) to recanalize 59 occluded superficial femoral arteries which had been unsuccessfully canalized by using the antegrade approach because of either a flush origin occlusion or inability to maintain the guide wire in the true lumen.  All PTS had claudication; 8 had rest pain; 3 had non-healing ulcers.  The laser Probe was used in 17 cases and the Rotablator in 3 cases.  Occlusion length varied between 1 and 40 cm: 7 lesions were less than 10 cm (group 1); 9 were between 10 and 20 cm (group 2); and 43 were greater than 20 cm (group 3).  An angiographic success was obtained in 48/59 lesions (81%): 14/16 (87%) in groups 1 and 2 and 34/43 (79%) in group 3.  Three PTS needed complementary common femoral endarterectomy and one required percutaneous aspiration of a thromboembolus.  Complications included: arterial perforation and/or dissection (without clinical sequelae) in 11 and a popliteal hematoma in 1 PT.  One patient with a severely ischemic leg underwent successful emergency vascular surgery, while another limb salvage patient required below-knee amputation.  There was no worsening of limb ischemia from any popliteal approach attempt.  At discharge, 39 patients (78%) whose outcome would have been unsuccessful with the traditional antegrade approach were clinically improved after utilizing the popliteal approach to achieve a successful angioplasty procedure.
Usefulness of digital angiography in the assessment of left ventricular ejection fraction.  With modern digital cardiac systems the image data are digitized on-line and in real-time, allowing the replay and subsequent interpretation and analysis during or directly after the cardiac catheterization procedure.  In this study we have evaluated the advantages and limitations of a manual tracing technique for left ventricular digital angiograms on the Phillips DCI system.  Thirty-three patients who were catheterized for suspected coronary artery disease were studied.  The manual tracings were performed by a senior cardiologist and an experienced function-analyst.  It was found that the short- and long-term intraobserver variabilities in the assessment of the global ejection fraction were very small; short-term mean difference +/- standard deviation (correlation coefficient): 0.5 +/- 2.7 (r = 0.97) global EF%-units; long term; 0.7 +/- 2.7 (r = 0.96) EF%-units.  The interobserver variabilities (5.1 +/- 4.8 (r = 0.93) EF%-units) were slightly higher than the intraobserver variabilities.  A decrease by 25% in the amount of contrast medium administered did not significantly influence the variabilities in the contour tracings, which would suggest the use of smaller doses.  At the average, the cardiologist and the function-analyst required 6 and 11 min of analysis time for a left ventricular study, respectively, emphasizing the need for further developments towards automated contour detection.  Finally, an excellent correlation was found with a standard off-line cinefilm analysis procedure.  Thus, it may be concluded that quantitative digital left ventricular angiography based on manual tracing of the outlines performed immediately following the cardiac catheterization (post-processing) is feasible as a routine procedure for the assessment of left ventricular function.
Nonuniform regional deformation of the pericardium during the cardiac cycle in dogs.  We hypothesized that local contact forces between the pericardium and the heart cause regional variation in pericardial deformation during the cardiac cycle, reflecting volume changes of the underlying cardiac chambers.  To test this, we measured regional pericardial area over the right atrium (RA) and right ventricle (RV) with orthogonal pairs of sonomicrometers in six open-chest dogs.  At a left ventricular end-diastolic pressure of 5 mm Hg, RV pericardial area paralleled RV volume, that is, shrinkage during ejection by 10 +/- 8% and expansion during filling.  RA pericardial area was reciprocally related to RV pericardial area, with average expansion during ventricular ejection of 2 +/- 2%, thus paralleling RA volume during RV ejection.  With volume loading, RV pericardial shrinkage during ejection increased to 14 +/- 6%, but the RA pericardial area change was no longer reciprocal (0 +/- 3% change during RV ejection).  Elimination of contact forces by cardiac tamponade resulted in both marked attenuation of RV pericardial area changes and synchronization of the RV and RA pericardial area pattern; that is, both shrank during RV ejection.  In two additional dogs, measurement of pericardial area over left ventricle and atrium showed similar results.  We conclude that dynamic pericardial contact forces cause regional variation in pericardial deformation, which reflects volume changes of the underlying chambers.  These findings imply that the influence of the pericardium on filling and ejection may be more complex than previously recognized, varying both by chamber and dynamically over the course of the cardiac cycle.
Biphasic effects of doxorubicin on the calcium release channel from sarcoplasmic reticulum of cardiac muscle.  To define the mechanism of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity, the effects of doxorubicin and caffeine were examined on calcium release channels from cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum.  We found that calcium release from cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum vesicles was induced by both compounds.  When sarcoplasmic reticulum vesicles were incorporated into planar lipid bilayers, calcium-permeable channels were observed.  Addition of caffeine (2.5-10 mM) increased channel open probability from less than 0.1% to 40%, and this effect persisted for a mean of 44 minutes.  In contrast, doxorubicin (2.5-10 microM) had a biphasic effect; initially, doxorubicin activated the channel, whereas after a mean of 8 minutes, the channel became irreversibly inhibited.  Although the degree of channel activation by doxorubicin was concentration dependent, the time needed to inactivate the channel was concentration independent.  Pretreatment with dithiothreitol (0.2 mM) prevented doxorubicin-induced channel inactivation, and channel activity persisted for an average of 58 minutes.  Dithiothreitol alone did not alter channel open probability.  Our results support the hypotheses that 1) the integrity of sulfhydryl groups is important for some aspects of calcium release channel function and 2) activation and inactivation of the channel are separable processes.  The biphasic effect of doxorubicin on channel function may also correspond to the clinically observed adverse effects of doxorubicin, a widely used chemotherapeutic agent that, after prolonged usage, causes a dilated cardiomyopathy.
Enhanced alpha 1-adrenergic responsiveness in cardiomyopathic hamster cardiac myocytes. Relation to the expression of pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein and alpha 1-adrenergic receptors.  The pathogenesis of the myopathy occurring in the heart of the cardiomyopathic strain of the Syrian hamster is not well understood but is believed to be associated with abnormal calcium handling by myopathic cells.  The purpose of this study was to determine whether the cardiomyopathy occurring in strain BIO 14.6 animals is associated with an enhanced alpha 1-adrenergic receptor-mediated rise in cytosolic calcium, whether a pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein is involved in coupling the alpha 1-adrenergic receptor to changes in intracellular calcium and whether enhanced alpha 1 responsiveness is associated with an increase in the level of expression of the alpha 1-adrenergic receptor or in the pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein or proteins.  To test the hypothesis that the cardiomyopathic state is associated with a greater alpha 1-receptor-mediated rise in cytosolic calcium, we studied the effect of phenylephrine (in the presence of propranolol) on time-averaged cytosolic calcium concentration ([Ca2+]i) in isolated cardiac myocytes from cardiomyopathic and age-matched control hamsters.  Phenylephrine caused a greater increase both in time-averaged [Ca2+]i (an increase of 48 +/- 8% versus 12 +/- 3%, p less than 0.01) and in contractility (+181 +/- 22% versus +35 +/- 9%, p less than 0.01) in cardiomyopathic than in normal cardiac myocytes.  Exposure to pertussis toxin (200 ng/ml for 3 hours) attenuated the alpha 1-adrenergic receptor-mediated increase in contractility and time-averaged [Ca2+]i in both cardiomyopathic and normal cells.  The level of pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein, as determined by pertussis toxin-mediated [32P]ADP-ribosylation, was 1.6-fold higher in cardiomyopathic versus normal hamster hearts.  The density of alpha 1-adrenergic receptors, as measured by the antagonist radioligand [3H]prazosin and the affinity of the receptor for agonist and antagonist were similar in myopathic and normal heart membranes.  Thus, in cardiac myocytes from hamsters, the alpha 1-adrenergic receptor-mediated effects on [Ca2+]i and contractility appear to be mediated by a pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein or proteins.  In myocytes from cardiomyopathic hamsters, these alpha 1-adrenergic effects were increased in magnitude, as was the level of pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein, but there was no measurable alteration in the density or ligand binding properties of alpha 1-adrenergic receptors.
Evidence for decreased coronary flow reserve in viable postischemic myocardium.  To try to unravel the complexity and heterogeneity of the "no-reflow" phenomenon and its underlying mechanisms, we studied tissue perfusion in reperfused heart muscle by using tracer microspheres in an anesthetized dog model of 90-minute coronary occlusion followed by reperfusion for 2 1/2 hours, 24 hours, or 1 week.  Regional myocardial blood flow was determined both in basal flow conditions and during reactive hyperemia.  The effect of intracoronary adenosine administration was examined, and the ultrastructure of postischemic myocardium was analyzed.  In viable reperfused tissue (as delineated by triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining), reflow in basal conditions is unimpaired.  Coronary flow reserve (as approximated by peak reactive hyperemic flow) is intact at the start of reperfusion, decreases by more than half after 2 1/2 hours, and recovers completely within 1 week.  This impairment of coronary reserve can be relieved by intracoronary adenosine administration.  On ultrastructural examination, the capillaries are patent.  On the other hand, in irreversibly damaged myocardium, both the basal reflow impairment and the decrease in coronary flow reserve are severe and permanent.  Coronary flow reserve is already decreased at the start of reperfusion, and the pharmacological intervention has no beneficial effect.  Ultrastructurally, extracellular and intracellular edema invariably are present, whereas the vascular endothelium is damaged and the capillaries are packed with red blood cells.  We conclude that the no-reflow phenomenon (i.e., mechanical obstruction to blood flow) is limited to infarcted tissue.  In viable myocardium, however, coronary flow reserve is transiently diminished, probably because of washout and subsequent insufficient availability of the chemical mediator adenosine after breakdown and slow recovery of the precursor ATP pool.
Time course of cellular enzyme release in dog heart injury.  The transport time of enzyme from heart to plasma was studied in two experimental models.  First, the enzyme alanine aminotransferase was slowly infused into the left ventricular wall in open-chest dogs.  The half-life for the washout of alanine aminotransferase activity into plasma was 20 +/- 4 minutes (mean +/- SEM, n = 8) and was not different in ischemic and normally perfused tissue.  From measurements of arteriovenous differences in alanine aminotransferase activity and left ventricular blood flow, it was concluded that 77 +/- 14% of total enzyme washout from ischemic tissue occurred by direct entry into the bloodstream.  The corresponding value for the vascular permeability-surface area product was 264 +/- 55 ml.kg-1.hr-1.  For a second model, we studied myocardial enzyme release into plasma after abrupt heart injury induced by 10 minutes of calcium-free coronary perfusion followed by reintroduction of calcium (calcium-paradox mechanism).  The half-life for the release into plasma was 1.9 +/- 0.2 hours (mean +/- SEM, n = 6) and was again not influenced by sustained ischemia.  Slower washout, as observed for this second model, is consistent with increased interstitial protein space and corresponds to a permeability--surface area product between 135 and 285 ml.kg-1.hr-1.  These results were used to calculate the time course of cellular enzyme leakage from the rate of enzyme release into plasma in various forms of heart injury.  Significant shifts between the time curves of evolving cellular injury and enzyme release into plasma are observed after 2 hours of ischemia followed by coronary reperfusion, but not after permanent ischemia.
Effects of adenosine on human coronary arterial circulation   Adenosine is a potent vasodilator used extensively to study the coronary circulation of animals.  Its use in humans, however, has been hampered by lack of knowledge about its effects on the human coronary circulation and by concern about its safety.  We investigated in humans the effects of adenosine, administered by intracoronary bolus (2-16 micrograms), intracoronary infusion (10-240 micrograms/min), or intravenous infusion (35-140 micrograms/kg/min) on coronary and systemic hemodynamics and the electrocardiogram.  Coronary blood flow velocity (CBFV) was measured with a 3F coronary Doppler catheter.  The maximal CBFV was determined with intracoronary papaverine (4.5 +/- 0.2.resting CBFV).  In normal left coronary arteries (n = 20), 16-micrograms boluses of adenosine caused coronary hyperemia similar to that caused by papaverine (4.6 +/- 0.7.resting CBFV).  In the right coronary artery (n = 5), 12-micrograms boluses caused maximal hyperemia (4.4 +/- 1.0.resting CBFV).  Intracoronary boluses caused a small, brief decrease in arterial pressure (similar to that caused by papaverine) and no changes in heart rate or in the electrocardiogram.  The duration of hyperemia was much shorter after adenosine than after papaverine administration.  Intracoronary infusions of 80 micrograms/min or more into the left coronary artery (n = 6) also caused maximal hyperemia (4.4 +/- 0.1.resting CBFV), and doses up to 240 micrograms/min caused a minimal decrease in arterial pressure (-6 +/- 2 mm Hg) and no significant change in heart rate or in electrocardiographic variables.  Intravenous infusions in normal patients (n = 25) at 140 micrograms/kg/min caused coronary vasodilation similar to that caused by papaverine in 84% of patients (4.4 +/- 0.9.resting CBFV).  At submaximal infusion rates, however, CBFV often fluctuated widely.  During the 140-micrograms/kg/min infusion, arterial pressure decreased 6 +/- 7 mm Hg, and heart rate increased 24 +/- 14 beats/min.  One patient developed 1 cycle of 2:1 atrioventricular block, but otherwise, the electrocardiogram did not change.  In eight patients with microvascular vasodilator dysfunction (delta CBFV, less than 3.5 peak/resting velocity after a maximally vasodilating dose of intracoronary papaverine), the dose-response characteristics to intracoronary boluses and intravenous infusions of adenosine were similar to those found in normal patients.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
Sex differences in control of cutaneous blood flow.  Women are far more likely than men to suffer from Raynaud's disease.  The purpose of this study was to determine whether there are gender differences in local or central control of cutaneous blood flow that could account for the increased incidence of Raynaud's disease in women.  To assess cutaneous blood flow, hand blood flow (HBF), finger blood flow (FBF), or skin perfusion (SP) was measured by fluid plethysmography, mercury strain-gauge plethysmography, or laser Doppler spectroscopy, respectively, in 47 volunteers.  Basal HBF in men exceeded that of women (12.1 +/- 2.0 versus 6.2 +/- 1.5 ml/100 ml/min).  Likewise, FBF in men surpassed that of women (19.5 +/- 4.1 versus 7.7 +/- 1.8 ml/100 ml/min).  Similarly, SP in men was greater than that of women (270 +/- 42 versus 81 +/- 16 perfusion units).  However, after total body warming (to induce a thermal sympatholysis), HBF in women exceeded that of men, suggesting that the lower basal HBF in women was due to increased sympathetic outflow to the extremities.  Mental stress and deep inspiration reduced HBF and SP in men.  Paradoxically, both of these maneuvers increased HBF and SP in women.  To determine whether these paradoxical responses in women were due to the women's elevated basal sympathetic tone, these experiments were repeated after total body cooling in men to increase sympathetic tone and after total body warming in women to reduce sympathetic tone.  Total body cooling reduced HBF and SP in men.  Under these conditions, mental stress and deep inspiration induced vasodilation.  In women, total body warming for 10 minutes increased HBF.
Mortality after 10 1/2 years for hypertensive participants in the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial   The Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT) is a randomized primary prevention trial that tested the effect of a multifactor intervention program on coronary heart disease (CHD) mortality in 12,866 high-risk men aged 35-57 years.  Men were randomly assigned to either a special intervention (SI) program, which consisted of dietary advice for lowering blood cholesterol levels, counseling aimed at cessation for cigarette smokers, and stepped-care treatment for hypertension for those with elevated blood pressure, or to their usual sources of health care within the community (UC).  Among the 12,866 randomized men, 8,012 (62%) were hypertensive at baseline.  For this subgroup, mortality rates with 10.5 years of follow-up were lower for the SI than for the UC group by 15% (p = 0.19) for CHD and 11% (p = 0.13) for all causes.  These results reflected more favorable outcomes for SI compared with UC hypertensive men during the 3.8 posttrial years (March 1982 through December 1985) than during the preceding 6-8 years (through February 1982).  During the posttrial years, death rates were lower for SI than for UC men by 26% (p = 0.09) for CHD and 23% (p = 0.02) for all causes.  For those with diastolic blood pressure equal to or more than 100 mm Hg, this posttrial trend was a continuation of a trend during the trial; therefore, with 10.5 years of follow-up, death rates were markedly lower for SI than for UC by 36% (p = 0.07) for CHD and 50% (p = 0.0001) for all causes.  Similarly, for those without baseline resting electrocardiographic abnormalities, the favorable posttrial outcome for the SI group was a continuation of a trend during the trial.  In contrast, for those with baseline diastolic blood pressure of 90-99 mm Hg and for those with baseline resting electrocardiographic abnormalities, the favorable posttrial mortality findings for the SI group were a reversal of unfavorable trends recorded during the trial.  Two factors appear to have contributed to this more favorable mortality trend for the SI group: 1) a change in the diuretic treatment protocol for SI men about 5 years after randomization, which involved replacement of hydrochlorothiazide with chlorthalidone at a daily maximum dose of 50 mg; and 2) a favorable effect of intervention on nonfatal cardiovascular events during the trial years.  In addition, delay until the full impact of beneficial effects on mortality end points from smoking cessation and cholesterol lowering could have contributed.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
Ten-year follow-up of survival and myocardial infarction in the randomized Coronary Artery Surgery Study   The Coronary Artery Surgery Study (CASS) randomized 780 patients to an initial strategy of coronary surgery or medical therapy.  Of medically randomized patients, 6% had surgery within 6 months and a total of 40% had surgery by 10 years.  At 10 years, there was no difference in cumulative survival (medical, 79% vs.  surgical, 82%; NS) and no difference in percentage free of death and nonfatal myocardial infarction (medical, 69% vs.  surgical, 66%; NS).  Patients with an ejection fraction of less than 0.50 exhibited a better survival with initial surgery treatment (medical, 61% vs.  surgical, 79%; p = 0.01).  Conversely, patients with an ejection fraction greater than or equal to 0.50 exhibited a higher proportion free of death and myocardial infarction with initial medical therapy (medical, 75% vs.  surgical, 68%; p = 0.04) although long-term survival remained unaffected (medical, 84% vs.  surgical, 83%; p = 0.75).  There were no significant differences either in survival and freedom from nonfatal myocardial infarction, whether stratified on presence of heart failure, age, hypertension, or number of vessels diseased.  Thus, 10-year follow-up results confirm earlier reports from CASS that patients with left ventricular dysfunction exhibit long-term benefit from an initial strategy of surgical treatment.  Patients with mild stable angina and normal left ventricular function randomized to initial medical treatment (with an option for later surgery if symptoms progress) have survival equivalent to those patients randomized to initial surgery.
Ten-year follow-up of quality of life in patients randomized to receive medical therapy or coronary artery bypass graft surgery. The Coronary Artery Surgery Study (CASS)   Quality of life indexes were assessed in 780 patients 10 years after randomization to medical therapy (n = 390) or coronary artery bypass graft surgery (n = 390) in the Coronary Artery Surgery Study.  At 10 years, mortality was 21.8% in the medical group and 19.2% in the surgical group (p = NS), and 144 (37%) of the medical group had undergone surgery because of increasing chest pain.  At study entry, 22% of medical and surgical patients were angina free; at 1 and 5 years after entry, the frequency of asymptomatic patients was 66% and 63% in the surgical group and 30% and 38% in the medical group.  However, by 10 years after entry, the proportion of patients free of angina had fallen to 47% in the surgical group and to 42% in the medical group.  Activity limitation and use of beta-blockers and long-acting nitrates were less in the surgical than the medical group at 1 and 5 years after entry but little different from the medical group at 10 years after entry.  Throughout follow-up, recreational status, employment status, frequency of heart failure, use of other medications, and hospitalization frequency were similar between the two groups.  Thus, indexes of quality of life such as angina relief, increased activity, and reduction in use of antianginal medications initially appear superior in patients with stable manifestations of ischemic heart disease assigned to surgery, but by 10 years after entry, these advantages are much less apparent.  Although the observed similarities of the medically and surgically assigned groups at 10 years reflect return of symptoms in the surgical group to some extent, a more important explanation is the performance of late surgery in a large proportion of the medically assigned patients, rendering them asymptomatic.
Blood pressure level, trend, and variability in Dunedin children. An 8-year study of a single birth cohort   In a birth cohort of children in the Dunedin Multidisciplinary Health and Development Study in New Zealand, resting blood pressures were recorded biennially five times from age 7 to 15 years.  Using previously described methods, we examined the level, trend, and variability of blood pressures in those children with at least three readings.  The level, trend, and variability of height, weight, and body mass index were compared among six separate groups of children.  Two groups were categorized on the basis of high systolic pressure levels, one with low variability and the other with high variability, which was thought to resemble adult labile hypertension.  Two additional groups were categorized on the basis of increasing and decreasing blood pressure trends; the fifth group had consistently low blood pressures, and the sixth group consisted of the remaining children.  There were significant differences among the groups for the level of all the physical measurements and for the trend of body mass index.  No significant differences were found among the groups for gender or socioeconomic status.  A parental history of high blood pressure, stroke, or heart attack was significantly more common in the first two groups.
Prognostic value of radionuclide angiography in medically treated patients with coronary artery disease. A comparison with clinical and catheterization variables.  To evaluate the usefulness of multiple measures from rest and exercise radionuclide angiography (RNA) in predicting cardiovascular death and cardiovascular events (death or nonfatal myocardial infarction) and to assess the prognostic usefulness of the RNA relative to clinical and catheterization data, we studied 571 stable patients with symptomatic coronary artery disease who had upright rest/exercise first-pass RNA within 3 months of catheterization and were medically treated.  With a median follow-up of 5.4 years, 90 patients have died from cardiovascular causes, and 147 patients have either died or suffered a nonfatal myocardial infarction.  Using the Cox regression model and a preselected group of RNA variables, the most important RNA predictor of mortality was exercise ejection fraction (chi 2 = 81, p less than 0.00001).  Neither rest ejection fraction nor the change in ejection fraction from rest to exercise contributed additional predictive information.  Two other RNA study variables, the change in heart rate from rest to exercise and rest end-diastolic volume index, did contribute additional prognostic information to the exercise ejection fraction (chi 2 = 23, p less than 0.0001).  Compared with noninvasive clinical data (history, physical examination, electrocardiogram, and chest radiograph), RNA variables were considerably more predictive of mortality (chi 2 = 71 [clinical variables] versus chi 2 = 104 [RNA]).  Remarkably, the strength of the relation of RNA variables with mortality was equivalent to that of the set of catheterization variables previously demonstrated in our large angiographic population to be prognostically important (chi 2 = 104 [RNA] versus chi 2 = 102 [catheterization variables]).  The RNA contained 84% of the information provided by clinical and catheterization descriptors combined.  Furthermore, the RNA contributed significant additional prognostic information to the clinical and catheterization data (chi 2 = 13.6, p = 0.0035).  For cardiovascular events, the relative prognostic usefulness of the RNA was similar, although relations with this outcome were generally weaker.  Descriptors from the rest/exercise RNA exhibit a powerful relation with long-term outcomes and can be useful in defining risk, even when clinical and catheterization data are available.
Prognostic value of electrophysiology testing in asymptomatic patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern [published erratum appears in Circulation 1991 Mar;83(3):1124]   The prognostic value of electrophysiology testing was studied in 75 asymptomatic patients with the Wolff-Parkinson-White electrocardiographic pattern.  All patients underwent electrophysiology testing at entry to the study and were followed up annually for a total of 348 patient-years (median, 4.3 years).  There were 44 male and 31 female patients, and age at enrollment ranged from 7 to 77 years (mean, 34 +/- 14 years).  The median effective refractory period of the accessory pathway was 293 msec (interquartile range, 280-310 msec), and the median shortest RR interval between preexcited beats during atrial fibrillation (SRR) [corrected] was 274 msec (240-320 msec).  Twenty-three patients had an SRR of 250 msec or less and eight patients had a median shortest SRR interval of 200 msec or less.  Twelve patients had inducible sustained reciprocating tachycardia, 10 patients had inducible nonsustained reciprocating tachycardia, and 23 patients had inducible sustained atrial fibrillation.  Twenty patients (27%) lacked retrograde conduction over the accessory pathway.  No patient died suddenly during a median follow-up of 4.3 years.  Six patients (8%) became symptomatic with documented supraventricular tachycardia, of whom two underwent operative ablation of their accessory pathways.  No patient with absent retrograde accessory pathway conduction during the electrophysiology study became symptomatic.  Inducible sustained or nonsustained reciprocating tachycardia at electrophysiology study did not predict the development of subsequent symptomatic supraventricular tachycardia.  Nine patients lost preexcitation during follow-up.  Age at enrollment (relative risk/decade, 1.4; 95% confidence interval, 1.0-1.8) and anterograde accessory pathway refractory period (relative risk, 1.06/10 msec; 95% confidence interval, 1.0-1.12) were independent predictors of loss of preexcitation.
Hormones regulating cardiovascular function in patients with severe congestive heart failure and their relation to mortality. CONSENSUS Trial Study Group.  There is a varying hormonal activation in heart failure.  To be able to evaluate this activation and relate it to prognosis, we took blood samples at baseline and after 6 weeks from 239 patients with severe heart failure (all in New York Heart Association class IV) randomized to additional treatment with enalapril or placebo.  In this study (CONSENSUS), which has previously been reported, there was a significant reduction in mortality among patients treated with enalapril.  The present data show in the placebo group a significant positive relation between mortality and levels of angiotensin II (p less than 0.05), aldosterone (p = 0.003), noradrenaline (p less than 0.001), adrenaline (p = 0.001), and atrial natriuretic factor (p = 0.003).  A similar relation was not observed among the patients treated with enalapril.  Significant reductions in mortality in the groups of patients treated with enalapril were consistently found among patients with baseline hormone levels above median values.  There were significant reductions in hormone levels from baseline to 6 weeks in the group of patients treated with enalapril for all hormones except adrenaline.  There were no correlations between these changes in hormone levels.  Summarily, there is a pronounced but variable neurohormonal activation in heart failure even in patients with similar clinical findings.  This activation is reduced by enalapril therapy.  The results suggest that the effect of enalapril on mortality is related to hormonal activation in general and the renin-angiotensin system in particular.
Excretion of thromboxane A2 and prostacyclin metabolites before and after exercise testing in patients with and without signs of ischemic heart disease.  We addressed the hypothesis that platelets are not activated in association with effort-induced myocardial ischemia in stable coronary disease.  Seventy-two patients undergoing a diagnostic bicycle exercise test were stratified according to the development of chest pain (yes/no, 33/39) and of exercise-induced ST-segment depression of at least 200 microV in the electrocardiogram (yes/no, 12/60).  Noninvasive indexes of platelet activation and of platelet/vessel wall interaction (urinary excretion of the 2,3-dinor-metabolites of thromboxane A2 [Tx-M] and prostacyclin [PGI-M], respectively) were analyzed in samples collected in the basal state and after the test.  Basal Tx-M and PGI-M did not differ in patients with (236 +/- 35 and 131 +/- 22 pg/mg creatinine, respectively) and without (185 +/- 16 and 101 +/- 13 pg/mg creatinine, respectively) chest pain, or in those with (178 +/- 45 and 162 +/- 41 pg/mg, respectively) and without (216 +/- 22 and 104 +/- 11 pg/mg, respectively) ST-segment depression during the test.  Patients without chest pain or without ST-segment depression moderately increased (p less than 0.05) their urinary Tx-M (by 21% and 13%, respectively) and PGI-M (by 28% and 23%, respectively) after exercise.  No significant increases were observed in those developing chest pain or ST depression during exercise.  These data indicate that effort-induced myocardial ischemia is not associated with an increase in platelet activation or platelet/vessel wall interaction in patients with stable coronary disease.
Effect of long-term exercise on regional myocardial function and coronary collateral development after gradual coronary artery occlusion in pigs.  The effect of myocardial ischemia, induced by long-term exercise, on regional myocardial function and coronary collateral development was examined in pigs after gradual occlusion of the left circumflex coronary artery (LCx) with an ameroid occluder.  Thirty days after surgery, regional myocardial function and blood flow were assessed during exercise in 22 pigs separated into exercise (n = 12) and sedentary groups (n = 10).  The exercise group trained on a treadmill for 25 +/- 1 days, 30-50 min/day, at heart rates of 210-220 beats/min.  After 5 weeks, another exercise test was performed.  In the exercise group, after training, we observed an improvement in systolic wall thickening, expressed as a percentage of rest, in the collateral-dependent LCx region from 64 +/- 8% to 87 +/- 6% (p less than 0.01) at moderate exercise levels (220 beats/min) and from 45 +/- 7% to 73 +/- 7% (p less than 0.01) at severe exercise levels (265 beats/min).  Transmural myocardial blood flow in the LCx region expressed as a ratio of flow in the nonoccluded region of the left ventricle also increased significantly (p less than 0.01) during severe exercise after 5 weeks.  The sedentary group showed an improvement in systolic wall thickening in the LCx region during moderate exercise compared with the initial exercise test (p less than 0.05) but no significant change in systolic wall thickening or myocardial blood flow ratios during severe exercise after 5 weeks.  We conclude that long-term exercise after gradual LCx coronary artery occlusion in pigs improves myocardial function and coronary collateral reserve in collateral-dependent myocardium during exercise.
Effect of tachycardia on regional function and transmural myocardial perfusion during graded coronary pressure reduction in conscious dogs   The purpose of the present study was to examine subendocardial flow and function during graded coronary pressure reduction to determine the effect of tachycardia on the lower autoregulatory pressure limit (critical coronary pressure) in unanesthetized dogs.  During atrial pacing at a rate of 200 beats/min, subendocardial flow measured by radioactive microspheres averaged 1.55 +/- 0.34 ml/min/g and remained unchanged as pressure was reduced over the autoregulatory plateau from 84 +/- 10 to 59 +/- 7 mm Hg.  Further reductions in coronary pressure to below a critical coronary pressure of approximately 60 mm Hg were associated with concomitant reductions in subendocardial flow and the endocardial-epicardial flow ratio during tachycardia.  Although regional function remained constant over the autoregulatory plateau, there was a rightward shift of the coronary pressure-function relation during ischemia in response to a steady-state increase in rate from 100 to 200 beats/min.  Reductions in regional wall thickening began when coronary pressures reached 38 +/- 7 mm Hg at a heart rate of 100 beats/min and 61 +/- 6 mm Hg at a heart rate of 200 beats/min (p less than 0.005).  Similar critical coronary pressure values were obtained for subendocardial segment shortening.  Relations between subendocardial flow and myocardial function measured by both transmural wall thickening and subendocardial segment shortening were linear during pacing at a heart rate of 200 beats/min with relative reductions in wall thickening related to reductions in subendocardial flow on a nearly one-to-one basis.  The results of this study demonstrate that there is a shift in the lower limit of subendocardial autoregulation during tachycardia as manifest by the onset of subendocardial ischemia at a higher distal coronary artery pressure.  The shift in critical coronary pressure relates to an increase in resting flow requirements due to increased demand and diminished subendocardial vasodilator reserve at any given coronary pressure secondary to a reduction in the time available for diastolic subendocardial perfusion during tachycardia.
Optimizing the exercise test for pharmacological investigations   Exercise trials in cardiology are often hindered by inconsistent approaches to exercise testing.  These inconsistencies include the choice of exercise protocol, exercise end points, points of analysis, and absence or misuse of gas exchange data.  Gas exchange techniques greatly enhance the accuracy with which cardiopulmonary function is assessed by exercise.  Commonly used protocols are not always appropriate for all patients or all studies.  Both cardiovascular disease and the exercise protocol can have an important impact on the relation between changes in work rate and oxygen uptake.  Ramp protocols appear to offer the greatest promise for assessing cardiopulmonary function.  Analyzing hemodynamic and gas exchange responses at several points submaximally, in addition to those at peak exercise, can add important information concerning the efficacy of a drug.  A great deal of confusion continues to hinder the application of the gas exchange anaerobic threshold, and many of the commonly used testing end points are not reliable.
Clinical evaluation of single versus multiple mammary artery bypass.  The superior patency and clinical advantages of internal mammary artery (IMA) grafting are well established.  However, the relative benefits of routine multiple IMA grafting remain uncertain.  To determine whether routine multiple compared with single IMA utilization improved survival of patients undergoing coronary bypass procedures, 1,063 patients were prospectively allocated, beginning in 1984, to divergent management strategies of single (group 1, n = 420) versus multiple IMA grafting (group 2, n = 643).  Subsequent analysis of anatomical extent of disease and preoperative baseline risk factors showed no differences (p = NS) between the two groups.  All variables reflecting operative technique were similar (p = NS) for the two groups, except 74% of group 1 patients with multivessel disease received a single IMA graft, whereas 71% of group 2 patients with multivessel disease received multiple IMAs (p less than 0.05).  By multivariate analysis, impairment of left ventricular ejection fraction, acute evolving myocardial infarction, advanced age, and unstable angina were incremental risk factors for mortality (all p less than 0.03), but group assignment (p = 0.4) and ultimate therapy were not (p = 0.6).  Survival probabilities (expressed as 30-day group 1/group 2; 4-year group 1/group 2) were overall (0.97/0.98; 0.93/0.90), elective (0.98/0.99; 0.97/0.92), acute (0.95/0.97; 0.89/0.88), age of less than 65 years (0.98/0.99; 0.97/0.93), age of 65 years or older (0.93/0.97; 0.84/0.89), ejection fraction of 0.40 or more (0.97/0.99; 0.95/0.94), ejection fraction of less than 0.40 (0.95/0.96; 0.87/0.82), nondiabetic (0.98/0.98; 0.94/0.91), and diabetic (0.92/0.97; 0.88/0.87).  No differences in survival were significant (p = NS).
Early and late results after isolated coronary artery bypass surgery in 159 patients aged 80 years and older.  We have studied 159 patients 80 years of age or older who have had isolated coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) since 1977.  Eighty-seven percent have had surgery since 1984.  Two thirds of the patients were male, and the mean age was 82 years.  Most patients (97%) were in New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class III or IV, 89% had unstable/postinfarction angina pectoris, and 67% had rest pain.  Almost half (47%) required preoperative admission to the coronary care unit, 6% required preoperative use of an intra-aortic balloon pump, and 20% were operated on emergently.  Significant left main coronary artery disease (greater than or equal to 50% stenosis) was present in 41%.  Ten patients (6.3%) died within 30 days of surgery, with seven more patients dying during the same hospital admission or soon after transfer to another institution.  This resulted in an overall hospital mortality of 10.7%.  The median hospital stay was 10 days.  On univariate analysis, the significant predictors of hospital mortality were NYHA IV, angina at rest, preoperative admission to the coronary care unit, emergency operation, ejection fraction less than 0.50, and the presence of mitral regurgitation.  On multivariate analysis, ejection fraction less than 0.50 was the only significant risk factor (p less than 0.01).  Of hospital survivors, 98% have been followed for a mean of 29 months.  The estimated 5-year survival (+/- SEM) of all patients was 71 +/- 4.5%, and for hospital survivors, 80 +/- 4.5%.  The most important predictor of adverse survival was an ejection fraction less than 0.50.  Seventy-nine percent are angina-free, and 89% are in NYHA classes I and II.  The majority of patients felt that they were improved by surgery.  We conclude that CABG in patients 80 years or older, although associated with increased operative risk, gives excellent relief of symptoms and good 5-year survival.  Patients should not be denied CABG because of age alone.
Surgical repair of postinfarction ventricular septal defect.  Thirty-one patients underwent repair of postinfarction ventricular septal defect (VSD) from 1980 to 1989.  All patients were in New York Heart Association functional class IV, and 15 of them were in cardiogenic shock when operated on.  Coronary arteriography was performed in all patients before surgery: nine had one-vessel, 11 had two-vessel, and 11 had three-vessel disease.  The VSD was anterior in 15 patients and posterior in 16.  The operative technique evolved over the years from a fairly extensive infarctectomy and reconstruction of the septum and right and left ventricular walls with a double Dacron patch, to minimal or no infarctectomy and closure of the VSD by excluding the infarcted muscle from the left ventricular cavity.  This is accomplished by suturing a single patch of bovine pericardium to healthy endocardium surrounding the infarcted muscle.  The right ventricle is left intact.  Overall mortality was 10%, with three operative deaths.  All deaths occurred in patients in cardiogenic shock who had three-vessel coronary artery disease.  Thus, the mortality for patients in shock was 20%, and the mortality for patients with three-vessel disease was 27%.  The operative mortality for patients with posterior VSD was twice as high as in patients with anterior VSD.  However, univariate analysis of various clinical, hemodynamic, and operative variables indicated that only three-vessel disease was predictive of operative mortality.  Because the number of patients was small and the overall operative mortality relatively low, the results of this analysis may not be valid.
Relative risks of left ventricular aneurysmectomy in patients with akinetic scars versus true dyskinetic aneurysms.  From 1971 to 1988, 303 patients underwent left ventricular aneurysm resection.  We analyzed preoperative and procedure-related variables to ascertain risk factors for surgery.  A distinction was made between akinetic and dyskinetic aneurysms to assess potential relation with postoperative outcome.  Indications for surgery were arrhythmia in 20 patients, congestive heart failure in 81, angina in 133, congestive heart failure and angina in 42, and other combinations in the remaining 27 patients.  The left ventricular aneurysm was dyskinetic in 180 patients and akinetic in 121.  Risk factors and surgical procedures were similar in both groups.  Left ventricular ejection fraction was less than or equal to 30% in 98 patients.  Coronary bypass grafting was performed in 269 patients, with an average of 2.3 grafts per patient.  Mitral valve replacement, the most common concomitant procedure, was performed in 16 patients.  Intra-aortic balloon assist was required postoperatively in 47 patients.  Overall operative mortality was 13% (38 patients) and was due to low cardiac output in 23 patients and arrhythmia in 12 patients.  Univariate and multivariate analyses related early mortality to New York Heart Association functional classification of heart failure, the predominant indications of arrhythmia or congestive heart failure, left ventricular ejection fraction less than or equal to 30%, the need for intra-aortic balloon support, and the excision of an akinetic (18%) rather than dyskinetic (8%) left ventricular aneurysm.  Over a follow-up period averaging nearly 5 years, the actuarial survival at 5 years was 63% in the dyskinetic group and 51% in the akinetic group.
Latissimus dorsi cardiomyoplasty in the treatment of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy.  Stimulated skeletal muscle grafts have been proposed as a means to reinforce ventricular wall in the treatment of severe myocardial failure.  Latissimus dorsi cardiomyoplasty was performed in 11 patients with advanced heart failure due to cardiomyopathy who were in New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III or IV despite maximal medical therapy.  There were no operative deaths.  Eight patients were followed for a mean of 10.8 months.  Two patients remain in muscle conditioning protocol.  One patient died with latissimus dorsi ischemia and congestive heart failure.  Four of the eight patients in long-term follow-up are in NYHA class I, three in class II, and one in class III.  At 3 months of follow-up, rest radioisotopic left ventricular ejection fraction increased from 20.5 +/- 3.6% to 26.8 +/- 8.1% (p less than 0.01).  Doppler-echocardiography demonstrated that left ventricular segmental wall shortening improved from 11.3 +/- 2.5% to 16.5 +/- 3.9% (p less than 0.01) and left ventricular stroke volume from 22.9 +/- 4.6 to 33.1 +/- 10 ml (p less than 0.01).  Cardiopulmonary exercise test showed that maximal oxygen consumption during treadmill test increased from 14.8 +/- 3.7 to 18.2 +/- 3.3 ml/kg.min (p less than 0.05).  At 6 months of follow-up, all the above values remained essentially unchanged.  Furthermore, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia was abolished without specific medical therapy in four patients.  Thus, cardiomyoplasty improves left ventricular function, reverses congestive heart failure, and may improve long-term survival in severe cardiomyopathies.
Five-year experience with triple-drug immunosuppressive therapy in cardiac transplantation.  Although triple-drug immunosuppression with a combination of cyclosporine, prednisone, and azathioprine has been shown to improve short-term survival after cardiac transplantation, its long-term effects still are unknown.  From December 1983 through December 1988, all patients (N = 139) who underwent orthotopic cardiac transplant at our institution received triple-drug immunosuppressant therapy.  Follow-up averaged 32.2 +/- 15.8 months.  Twenty-one patients died; 134 survived more than 30 days.  Actuarial survival was 92% at 1 year, 85% at 3 years, and 78% at 5 years.  Twenty-five episodes of acute graft rejection were diagnosed in 21 of the 139 recipients (0.18 episode per patient).  In patients, the incidence of infection was 0.82 episode; 72% of infections were viral, with 10% due to cytomegalovirus.  The incidence of coronary artery disease was 10% at 1 year, 25% at 3 years, and 36% at 5 years.  Coronary artery disease was responsible for 60% of late deaths.  Arterial hypertension developed in 81% of patients, despite relatively well-maintained renal function (serum creatinine, 1.7 +/- 0.3 mg/dl).  Skeletal complications occurred in 15.8% and lymphoma in 1.4% of recipients.  Complete long-term rehabilitation was achieved in all but two of the surviving patients.  These data support the short- and long-term effectiveness of triple-drug therapy.  This regimen reduces the incidence of rejection, infection, and lymphoma, as well as the degree of renal failure.  However, the incidence of posttransplant coronary artery disease has not been reduced, and graft atherosclerosis represents the major cause of late graft failure and death.
The changing clinical spectrum of thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger's disease).  Between 1970 and 1987, 112 patients were diagnosed as having thromboangiitis obliterans (TAO).  The age was 42 +/- 11 years (mean +/- SD; range, 20-75 years); 23% were women, and 7% were more than 60 years old when they were first diagnosed.  Ischemic ulcerations were present in 85 (76%) patients: 24 (28%) patients with upper-extremity, 39 (46%) patients with lower-extremity, and 22 (26%) patients with both upper- and lower-extremity lesions.  Ninety-one (81%) patients had rest pain, 49 (44%) patients had Raynaud's phenomenon, and 43 (38%) patients had superficial thrombophlebitis.  We were able to follow up 89 of the 112 (79%) patients for 1-460 months (mean follow-up time, 91.6 +/- 84 months).  Sixty-five (73%) patients had no amputations, while 24 (27%) had one or more of the following amputations: finger, six (15%) patients; toe, 13 (33%) patients; transmetatarsal, four (10%) patients; below knee, 14 (36%) patients; and above knee, two (5%) patients.  Forty-three (48%) patients stopped smoking for a mean of 80 +/- 105 months (median, 46.5 months; range, 1-420 months), and only two (5%) patients had amputations after they stopped smoking, while 22 (42%) patients had amputations while continuing to smoke (p less than 0.0001).  The spectrum of patients with TAO is changing in that the male-to-female ratio is decreasing (3:1), more older patients are being diagnosed, and upper-extremity involvement is commonly present.  In the 48% of patients who stopped smoking, amputations and continued disease activity were uncommon.
High-risk reparative surgery. A neglected alternative to heart transplantation.  The selection of patients for either high-risk reparative operations on the heart or for transplantation has become increasingly difficult as a result of improved results with both modalities.  A retrospective review was done of patients referred for heart transplantation who were not considered candidates for conventional cardiac surgery, yet instead underwent reparative procedures rather than transplantation.  Of 23 adult patients referred during a 7-year period, 18 had coronary artery disease, and five had valvular heart disease.  All had New York Heart Association class IV symptoms.  Preoperative left ventricular ejection fractions were in the range 0.08-0.63 (mean, 0.28).  Ten of 18 patients with coronary artery disease required insertion of an intra-aortic balloon pump for hemodynamic support perioperatively.  Seven patients had primary coronary artery bypass grafts, and 10 had reoperative coronary bypass procedures.  One patient had a left ventricular aneurysmectomy, and one had endocardial stripping in addition to myocardial revascularization procedures.  Of the patients with valvular disease, three had aortic valve replacement, of which two were reoperations, and two others had mitral valve replacements with tricuspid annuloplasties.  With a mean follow-up of 25 months, 1-, 3-, 12-, and 24-month actuarial survival rates were 91%, 87%, 82%, and 76%, respectively.  One patient who underwent aortic valve replacement in this study successfully received heart transplantation 19 months postoperatively.  These results compare favorably with the current results for patients undergoing first-graft heart transplantation.  All survivors enjoy New York Heart Association class I or II functional capacity.
Bradyarrhythmia after heart transplantation. Incidence, time course, and outcome.  From June 1980 to April 1989, 72 of 401 (18%) adult recipients of orthotopic heart transplantation developed prolonged (greater than 24 hours) bradyarrhythmias (less than 60 beats/min) within 5 days after transplantation.  Junctional bradycardia occurred in 50 (69%) recipients, sinus bradycardia in 18 (25%), and slow ventricular response during atrial fibrillation in four (6%).  Fifty-five of 72 (76%) patients had bradyarrhythmias of less than 20 days' duration (less than 7 days, 50 patients; 7-20 days, five patients).  Fifty patients returned to sinus rhythm (greater than 60 beats/min) by the time of discharge.  Five patients expired within 20 days.  Seventeen of 72 (24%) patients had bradyarrhythmia for more than 20 days, which was symptomatic in 11.  All 17 patients (junctional bradycardia, 13 patients; sinus bradycardia, four patients) received a permanent pacemaker within 40 days after transplantation.  Between 1 and 12 months (mean, 4 +/- 3 months) after pacemaker implantation, 12 patients recovered sinus rhythm (greater than 70 beats/min).  The other five patients had intrinsic rates of 32-57 beats/min (mean, 48 +/- 10 beats/min) during 1-9 months (mean, 4 +/- 3 months) of follow-up.  The donor ischemic time in bradyarrhythmia patients was 202 +/- 34 minutes, which was significantly longer (p less than 0.01) than the 173 +/- 43 minutes for those patients without bradyarrhythmia.  Conclusively, the incidence of posttransplantation bradyarrhythmia is relatively high.  It is usually temporary, however, even in patients with a prolonged duration of bradyarrhythmia.  A relation appears to exist between donor ischemic time and the incidence of bradyarrhythmia.
Factors affecting survival in total artificial heart recipients before transplantation.  To identify factors affecting the successful bridge to transplantation, experience with 32 recipients of the Jarvik-7 artificial heart was reviewed.  Between patients with and without a successful bridge, there were no significant differences in preoperative hepatorenal function or postoperative hemodynamics, but there were significant differences in body size.  When recipients were divided according to body surface areas of less than or greater than 1.8 m2, the smaller patients more frequently developed respirator dependence (73% vs.  18%, p less than 0.01), renal failure (53% vs.  18%, p less than 0.05), and hepatic failure and sepsis, resulting in less frequent qualification for transplantation (20% vs.  65%, p less than 0.05).  There were no successful bridge operations in seven patients with body surface areas of less than 1.7 m2, and only one success in nine patients who were less than 170 cm in height, despite use of a smaller stroke volume model.  The smaller patients had poorer ventricular filling, which was largely compensated for by the drive controls set for significantly longer diastole and higher vacuum, resulting in similar hemodynamics between the groups.  The results suggest that device fitting as manifested by body size is an important factor affecting major organ recovery and subsequent transplantation in recipients of the Jarvik-7 artificial heart.  A paracorporeal device may be advisable for patients with body surface areas of less than 1.8 m2 or who were less than 175 cm in height until an even smaller model with a better fit in the thorax becomes available.
Deferoxamine fails to improve postischemic cardiac function in hypertrophied hearts.  Myocardial hypertrophy is a well-recognized risk factor in congenital cardiac surgery.  Hypertrophied hearts have been demonstrated to have an increased vulnerability to ischemia/reperfusion injury.  We studied the effects of the iron chelator and hydroxyl radical scavenger deferoxamine given during early reperfusion in a model of isolated retroperfused rabbit hearts made hypertrophic by aortic banding early in life (1 week of age).  The rabbits were studied at 6-8 weeks of age, and the hearts were subjected to 30 minutes of 37 degrees C ischemia followed by 30 minutes of reperfusion.  Postischemic recovery of isovolumic developed pressure was measured by using an intracavitary balloon in both the untreated (n = 6) and the deferoxamine-treated (n = 6) groups and compared with normal age-matched controls.  Deferoxamine (50 mumol/kg) was given to one group with the hypertrophied hearts during the first 10 minutes of reperfusion.  The left ventricular weight/body weight ratio in the hypertrophied hearts was 2.9 +/- 0.4 x 10(-3) (n = 14) versus 2.0 +/- 0.1 x 10(-3) in the age-matched controls (p less than 0.05).  Postischemic peak developed pressure recovered to 102 +/- 6% of the preischemic value in the normal hearts after 30 minutes of reperfusion compared with 75 +/- 5% for the untreated and 71 +/- 4% for the deferoxamine-treated hearts (p less than 0.05 vs.  control).  We conclude that chronic hypertrophy from early in life leads to increased susceptibility to ischemia and that the iron chelator deferoxamine is not effective in preventing the injury of reperfusion in hypertrophied hearts.
Right ventricular function and metabolism.  Right ventricular protection may be limited with current methods of cardioplegic delivery.  Sensitive measurements of right and left ventricular function and metabolism were made in 30 patients undergoing elective coronary artery bypass surgery with cold cardioplegic arrest.  Myocardial adenine nucleotide concentrations decreased with cardioplegia and reperfusion in both the right and left ventricles despite adequate levels of precursors, suggesting perioperative mitochondrial dysfunction.  Postoperatively, right and left ventricular pressures were measured with micromanometer catheters and volumes were measured by nuclear ventriculography.  Right and left ventricular systolic elastance was calculated by the isochronic method and by the end-systolic method.  Both methods provided sensitive indexes of end-systolic elastance.  This study demonstrated that right ventricular function and metabolism can be evaluated by methods analogous to methods used in the left ventricle.  These results suggest that right ventricular functional and metabolic recovery are delayed despite apparently adequate myocardial protection.  Sensitive measurements may permit improved assessment of alternative methods of right ventricular protection.
Is adenosine 5'-triphosphate derangement or free-radical-mediated injury the major cause of ventricular dysfunction during reperfusion? Role of adenine nucleoside transport in myocardial reperfusion injury.  The aim of this study was to determine the dual role of ATP as an energy substrate and as a major source of oxygen-derived free-radical-mediated reperfusion injury by using adenine nucleoside blocker, p-nitrobenzylthioinosine (NBMPR), and adenosine deaminase inhibitor, erythro-9-(2-hydroxy-3-nonyl)adenine (EHNA).  In a randomized study, 16 dogs were instrumented with minor-axis LTZ-piezoelectric crystals and intraventricular pressure transducers to monitor, off bypass, left ventricular performance by using a sensitive and load-independent index of contractility (slope of the stroke work-end-diastolic length relation).  Hearts were subjected to 60 minutes of normothermic global ischemia and 120 minutes of reperfusion.  Normal saline without (Group 1, n = 8) or with (Group 2, n = 8) NBMPR and EHNA was infused in three boluses into the cardiopulmonary bypass reservoir before ischemia and reperfusion.  Transmural serial biopsies were obtained before and during ischemia and reperfusion and analyzed for myocardial adenine nucleotide pool intermediates by using high-performance liquid chromatography.  In the control group, three hearts developed ischemic contracture and another three hearts exhibited cardiogenic shock during reperfusion.  In the EHNA/NBMPR-treated group, left ventricular performance recovered within 30 minutes of reperfusion (p less than 0.05 vs.  control).  Myocardial ATP was depleted to 20% of normal in both groups by the end of ischemia (p less than 0.05).  Intramyocardial adenosine in the EHNA/NBMPR-treated group was 12-fold greater (15.09 +/- 1.6 nmol/mg protein) than the control group at the end of the ischemic period (p less than 0.05).  Inosine was about fourfold higher in the control group (19.07 +/- 1.50 nmol/mg protein) compared with the drug-treated group (p less than 0.05).  During reperfusion, myocardial ATP levels increased to approximately 50% of normal in the EHNA/NBMPR group while remaining depressed (20% of normal) in the control group.  Thus, despite the dramatic loss of myocardial ATP during ischemia, complete recovery of ventricular performance and significant repletion of ATP during reperfusion were observed when adenosine transport and deamination were modulated during ischemia and reperfusion.  These results suggest that 1) the myocardium may have more ATP than is needed for basic cardiac functions and 2) washout of ATP diffusible catabolites is detrimental to ventricular performance during reperfusion.  Specific blockade of nucleoside transport resulted in complete functional recovery despite low but critical ATP levels.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
Prolonged cardiac preservation. Evaluation of the University of Wisconsin preservation solution by comparison with the St. Thomas' Hospital cardioplegic solutions in the rat.  The University of Wisconsin solution differs from other types of solutions used for organ preservation because it contains high-energy phosphate precursors (adenosine and phosphate), impermeants (lactobionate and raffinose), an oncotic agent (pentafraction), and antioxidants (allopurinol and glutathione).  These components have the potential to enhance the preservation of ATP, reduce intracellular and extracellular edema, and attenuate free-radical-mediated injury.  The University of Wisconsin solution has been demonstrated to enhance and extend the preservation of the liver, pancreas, and kidney, but its potential role in the heart remains unproven.  We have evaluated the University of Wisconsin solution (Du Pont) by comparing it with the St.  Thomas' Hospital cardioplegic solutions No.  1 and No.  2 (Plegisol), which are used in Europe and the United States for routine cardiac surgery and transplantation.  For each solution, 10 isolated working rat hearts were arrested by 10 ml of the solution (at 4 degrees C) and then maintained immersed in the same solution for 4 hours at 4 degrees C.  Mean recovery of functional indexes (expressed as a percentage of their preischemic control values) after use of the University of Wisconsin solution were as follows: peak aortic pressure, 90.6 +/- 1.0; dP/dt, 71.5 +/- 5.5; aortic flow, 81.6 +/- 4.7; coronary flow, 87.5 +/- 3.5; and cardiac output, 82.6 +/- 3.5.  In contrast, the mean recoveries after St.  Thomas' Hospital solution No.  1 were as follows: peak aortic pressure, 82.8 +/- 1.3; dP/dt, 49.7 +/- 3.0; aortic flow, 58.4 +/- 5.3; coronary flow, 79.6 +/- 5.9; and cardiac output, 63.0 +/- 4.9.  In contrast still, mean recoveries after St.  Thomas' Hospital solution No.  2 were as follows: peak aortic pressure, 83.1 +/- 1.2; dP/dt, 40.7 +/- 6.1; aortic flow, 37.0 +/- 5.1; coronary flow, 65.8 +/- 3.6; and cardiac output, 43.1 +/- 5.6.  The recovery of all indexes were significantly superior (p less than 0.005) after preservation with University of Wisconsin solution compared with either of the St.  Thomas' Hospital solutions.
Efficacy of recombinant-derived human superoxide dismutase on porcine left ventricular contractility after normothermic global myocardial ischemia and hypothermic cardioplegic arrest.  A porcine model of normothermic global ischemia (40 minutes) followed by systemic cooling to 25 degrees C with 4 degrees C crystalloid cardioplegic arrest (90 minutes) was used to assess the efficacy of recombinant-derived human superoxide dismutase (r-HSOD) on postreperfusion left ventricular function while on cardiopulmonary bypass.  Isovolumic hemodynamic function was monitored, and adenine nucleotide pool was measured in myocardial biopsy specimens and coronary sinus effluent.  The treatment group of pigs (n = 7) received 15 mg/kg r-HSOD immediately before warm reperfusion, both left ventricular peak systolic pressure and developed pressure were significantly better in the r-HSOD group of pigs (p less than 0.05 vs.  placebo).  This improvement persisted at 60 minutes of reperfusion (p less than 0.05 vs.  placebo).  Myocardial ATP and total adenine nucleotides did not differ, nor did adenine nucleotide catabolites in the coronary sinus effluent differ between treatment groups of pigs.  The exception to this was the nucleotide catabolite inosine, which was significantly elevated in coronary sinus effluent of pigs treated with r-HSOD at 30 minutes of reperfusion (p less than 0.05 vs.  placebo).  In this model of global ischemia and reperfusion, a recombinant-derived human free-radical scavenger provides significant protection of systolic but not diastolic function.  Values for myocardial ATP and total adenine nucleotide content suggest that the improvement in mechanical function during reperfusion is not due to enhanced preservation of myocardial bioenergetics.
Effects of low perfusate Ca2+ concentration on newborn myocardial function after ischemia.  A greater dependence on transsarcolemmal Ca2+ flux and immaturity of Ca2+ sequestration capacity may potentiate Ca2(+)-mediated reperfusion injury in the newborn myocardium.  The effect of serum ionized Ca2+ concentration on left ventricular systolic and diastolic function after ischemia was studied in 5-7-day-old piglets undergoing a 90-minute period of cold-blood cardioplegic arrest.  In the control group, Ca2+ was maintained at 1.2 mM (Group A [n = 6]).  The cardioplegic solution and bypass perfusate were modified to achieve a low Ca2+ concentration, 0.25 mM, in Group B (n = 6).  Left ventricular pressure-volume loops were acquired by using high-fidelity pressure-sensor-tipped and volume-conductance catheters.  Ventricular function was assessed from the slope of end-systolic (Ees) and end-diastolic (k) pressure-volume relations during transient caval occlusion.  Both groups showed a significant reduction in Ees after ischemia (p less than 0.05).  Intergroup comparison of Ees after ischemia demonstrated a better recovery of the systolic function in the low Ca2+ group, 64 +/- 7% versus 49 +/- 6% in the normal Ca2+ group (p = 0.05).  There was a significant increase in chamber stiffness index in group A (k, 0.48 +/- 0.06 to 0.65 +/- 0.05 ml-1, p less than 0.01) versus no significant change in group B.  This study shows 1) the feasibility of acquiring continuous pressure-volume data in neonatal hearts by using a conductance catheter system, and 2) better preservation of systolic function and diastolic compliance in normal newborn myocardium by low Ca2+ concentration in the peri-ischemic period.
Comparison of medical and surgical therapy for uncomplicated descending aortic dissection.  To guide the choice of medical versus surgical therapy for patients with descending (type B) aortic dissection (tear in the descending aorta without involvement of the ascending aorta), multivariate survival analysis was applied to 136 patients admitted to two medical centers between 1975 and 1988 with acute (n = 89) or chronic (n = 47) descending dissection: group 1, all 136 patients; group 2, 106 patients without rupture, pulse loss, or visceral organ compromise; and group 3, 56 patients from group 2 without major cardiac or renal disease (23 surgical and 33 medical).  Group 3 medical and surgical subgroups were well matched for baseline characteristics and were potential candidates for either mode of therapy.  By Cox model analysis, significant predictors of mortality were pleural rupture, other dissection complications, increasing age, and cardiac disease (all p less than 0.01).  Surgical versus medical therapy was not an independent determinant of survival in any of the three groups for acute or chronic dissection.  Survival probabilities for all group 3 patients at 1, 5, and 10 years were 0.94, 0.87, and 0.32 (medical) and 0.90, 0.80, and 0.50 (surgical).  Despite the limitations of this retrospective study (including the possibility of undefined treatment selection biases), these data suggest that medical or early surgical therapy is associated with equivalent outcome in selected patients with uncomplicated acute or chronic descending aortic dissection.
The antihypertensive efficacy of hydrochlorothiazide is not prostacyclin dependent.  We tested the hypothesis that vascular prostacyclin synthesis is stimulated by hydrochlorothiazide and could account for some of the drug's antihypertensive effect.  We studied 13 patients with mild essential hypertension in a randomized, double-blind design to assess the effects of indomethacin on hydrochlorothiazide's ability to lower blood pressure, alter body weight, stimulate plasma renin activity, and modulate vascular prostacyclin biosynthesis as assessed by the urinary excretion of the major enzymatically produced metabolite of prostacyclin, 2,3-dinor-6-keto-prostaglandin F1 alpha (PGF1 alpha), measured by GC/MS.  Administration of hydrochlorothiazide, 50 mg daily for 2 weeks, was associated with a significant decrease in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure in both supine (systolic, 148 +/- 3 to 136 +/- 3 mm Hg; diastolic, 97 +/- 2 to 94 +/- 3 mm Hg) and upright (systolic, 151 +/- 4 to 131 +/- 2 mm Hg; diastolic, 103 +/- 2 to 97 +/- 3 mm Hg) positions.  Hydrochlorothiazide administration resulted in a 1 kg weight loss and stimulation of plasma renin activity from 1.7 +/- 0.4 to 5.3 +/- 1.1 ng angiotensin I/ml/hr.  However, the urinary excretion of 2,3-dinor-6-keto-PGF1 alpha was unchanged after administration of hydrochlorothiazide (86 +/- 13/ng/gm creatinine during placebo, 74 +/- 13 ng/gm during week 1 of hydrochlorothiazide, and 70 +/- 9 ng/gm during week 2 of the drug).  Administration of indomethacin, 50 mg twice a day, resulted in greater than 60% inhibition of 2,3-dinor-6-keto-PGF1 alpha excretion but did not affect the antihypertensive response to hydrochlorothiazide.  Indomethacin did not oppose the diuretic effect of hydrochlorothiazide as assessed by weight loss but did attenuate the rise in plasma renin activity.  Our data demonstrate that the blood pressure-lowering effect of a thiazide diuretic does not require enhanced prostacyclin synthesis and the cyclooxygenase inhibitor indomethacin does not antagonize the antihypertensive efficacy of hydrochlorothiazide.
Quality of life among hypertensive patients with a diuretic background who are taking atenolol and enalapril.  The cardioselective beta-blocker atenolol and the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor enalapril were compared for efficacy, safety, and quality-of-life factors in 30 patients with hypertension whose hypertension was inadequately controlled with diuretic alone.  Atenolol (50 to 100 mg once a day) and enalapril (2.5 to 40 mg once a day), combined with hydrochlorothiazide (25 mg once a day), had similar levels of efficacy and safety.  A comprehensive battery of psychologic assessments for quality of life was administered, including measures of anxiety, depression, psychiatric symptoms, memory, and psychomotor function.  These five conceptually based clusters were first analyzed by multivariate analysis of variance procedures, followed by univariate analyses of the individual variables composing each domain.  In general, neither atenolol nor enalapril was associated with major changes in psychologic functioning.  The only data cluster with a statistically significant change was memory function, primarily as a result of lower scores of the digit span (backward) test, for atenolol relative to enalapril.  These preliminary findings suggest that atenolol and enalapril have comparable degrees of efficacy and safety, with no major disparities in quality-of-life effects, for hypertensive patients with a history of taking diuretics and this sort of quality-of-life assessment can be performed during trials of antihypertensive drugs.
Increased erythrocyte sodium-lithium countertransport activity in essential hypertension is due to an increased affinity for extracellular sodium.  1.  Sodium-lithium countertransport activity in a standard assay, its sodium affinity constant and maximum velocity were measured in erythrocytes from normal subjects and from essential hypertensive patients with and without a family history of hypertension.  2.  In normal subjects the sodium concentration used in the standard assay was similar to the sodium affinity constant so that the activity measured in this assay was less than the maximum velocity.  3.  In patients with essential hypertension and a positive family history, 33% had a sodium-lithium countertransport activity greater than the upper limit of the normal control range (0.4 mmol of Li+ h-1 l-1 of cells).  4.  The reason for the raised sodium-lithium countertransport activity was an increased sodium affinity (lower sodium affinity constant) at the outside ion-binding site.  5.  Of the patients with essential hypertension and a positive family history but sodium-lithium countertransport activity within the normal range in the standard assay, 30% also had a low sodium affinity constant.  6.  A low sodium affinity constant at the outside site of the sodium-lithium countertransporter may be a more specific indicator for a group of patients with inherited hypertension than the standard sodium-lithium countertransport activity assay.
Depression and recovery of right ventricular function after cardiopulmonary bypass.  Transient left ventricular dysfunction is commonly described in association with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB).  We evaluated changes in right ventricular (RV) function after elective cardiac surgery in 24 patients with normal preoperative cardiac function.  In all, irrespective of distribution of coronary artery disease or use of pharmacologic support, a transient depression of RV systolic function with respect to both preinduction and initial postoperative (Postop) values occurred 262 +/- 116 min post-CPB as represented by a decrease in RV stroke volume index (25.0 +/- 1.7 vs.  33.4 +/- 1.9 ml/m2 Postop) and RV ejection fraction (31.0 +/- 2.2 vs.  45.6 +/- 2.5% Postop), and an increase in RV end-systolic and end-diastolic volume indices.  This depression responded readily to pharmacologic therapy within 2 h, resolved within 24 h, and had no adverse consequences in these otherwise healthy patients.  Further studies are needed to identify the cause of this phenomenon and its importance in patients with preexisting cardiac dysfunction.
Bronchial hyperreactivity in patients with mitral valve disease.  To elicit the mechanism of bronchial hyperreactivity (BHR) in chronic heart failure (CHF), a methacholine inhalation test, pulmonary function test, and cardiac catheterization were performed in 19 patients with mitral valve disease (MVD), and the change of severity of BHR before and after mitral valve replacement (MVR) was also examined in seven of 19 patients with MVD.  Sixteen of 19 patients with MVD showed significant increase in respiratory resistance in methacholine inhalation test, while all normal subjects did not.  The maximal expiratory flow at 25 percent of vital capacity (Vmax25), a parameter of small airway disease, correlated significantly with log cumulative dose producing a 35 percent decrease in respiratory conductance (PD35Grs) (r = 0.536) and the duration of symptoms (r = -0.682).  There was a significant correlation between log PD35Grs and mean pulmonary artery wedge pressure (r = -0.466).  After MVR, log PD35Grs was significantly improved in all seven operated-on patients, although six patients retained BHR.  We conclude that patients with long-term MVD have marked BHR and that BHR in long-term MVD is related to peripheral airway narrowing with organic remodeling, which was not ameliorated with MVR procedure, in addition to pulmonary congestion.
Respiratory muscle strength in congestive heart failure.  In experimental animals, conditions which drastically decrease cardiac output may reduce the strength and endurance of respiratory muscles leading to hypercapnic respiratory failure.  Because patients with chronic CHF have reduced cardiac output and vital capacity (FVC), we measured PImax and PEmax and maximal handgrip force in 16 patients with CHF and 18 AMNs.  The patients with CHF had a mean left ventricular ejection fraction of 26 +/- 7 percent.  Maximal respiratory pressures were significantly reduced; group mean values (+/- SD) for PImax at FRC were 41.4 +/- 5.6 cm H2O (CHF) and 102.1 +/- 27.4 cm H2O (AMN) (p less than 0.001), with PImax values in five patients with CHF as low as 20 to 30 cm H2O.  In most patients, PEmax was comparably reduced.  Handgrip force was less dramatically reduced, suggesting selective respiratory muscle weakness.  Possible explanations include reduction in respiratory muscle blood flow or generalized muscular atrophy and weakness related to cardiac cachexia.
The effects of phenylephrine on right ventricular performance in patients with pulmonary hypertension   Pulmonary hypertension causes right ventricular ischemia and failure as a result of increased afterload combined with reduced coronary blood flow.  Increasing coronary driving pressure by raising aortic pressure with phenylephrine has been shown to reverse right ventricular ischemia from pulmonary hypertension in animals.  Since vasodilators often fail to reduce afterload, we tested whether raising the coronary driving pressure would improve right ventricular function in man.  Ten patients with pulmonary hypertension had hemodynamics and right ventricular coronary driving pressure measured before and 10 minutes after a steady state was reached with a phenylephrine infusion titrated to raise aortic pressure by 25 percent.  Phenylephrine caused a significant (p less than .01) increase in mean aortic pressure (84 to 108 mm Hg) and right ventricular coronary driving pressure (46 to 69 mm Hg).  In response, there was a significant (p less than .01) rise in mean pulmonary artery pressure (58 to 67 mm Hg), right ventricular end-diastolic pressure (10 to 16 mm Hg) and wedge pressure (5 to 9 mm Hg), and an insignificant fall in cardiac output (3.26 to 3.09 L/min) and pulmonary artery O2 saturation (57 to 49 percent).  Although phenylephrine increased right ventricular coronary driving pressure, it worsened right ventricular function as manifest by a rise in end-diastolic pressure and fall in cardiac output.  Any benefit of raising right ventricular coronary driving pressure may have been offset by alpha vasoconstriction of right ventricular coronary blood flow and/or pulmonary arterial vasoconstriction.  Phenylephrine does not appear to be a useful therapy of right ventricular failure from pulmonary hypertension in patients who fail vasodilators.
Single lung transplantation for primary pulmonary hypertension.  Single lung transplantation has become a therapeutic option for end-stage interstitial lung disease and obstructive lung disease.  Our group recently extended this treatment to three patients with primary pulmonary hypertension.  All patients had marked decreases in pulmonary artery pressures and pulmonary vascular resistance and increases in cardiac output following single lung transplantation.  Spirometry, lung volumes, and diffusion capacity were not different in comparison to preoperative studies.  Quantitative ventilation-perfusion scans revealed the majority of perfusion distributed to the transplanted lung, with ventilation approximately equally divided between the native and the transplanted lung.  Despite ventilation-perfusion imbalance, there was no resting hypoxemia and there was no arterial oxygen desaturation with exercise.  One patient expired on the 30th postoperative day due to cytomegalovirus infection of the lungs.  In the remaining two patients, maximum exercise capacity following transplantation was near normal in one recipient and reduced in the second recipient.  Of note, there was no evidence of ventilatory limitation or impaired oxygenation during exercise in these two recipients.  Although an exaggerated exercise ventilatory response was present, this did not limit exercise performance.  This report supports the use of single lung transplantation for the treatment of primary pulmonary hypertension.
Abnormal hemodynamic response to Valsalva maneuver in patients with atrial septal defect evaluated by Doppler echocardiography.  Hemodynamic responses to the Valsalva maneuver were studied in eight healthy subjects (group 1) and eight patients with ASD (group 2) using Doppler echocardiography.  The acute changes of aortic blood flow profiles during the Valsalva maneuver were investigated on a basis of beat-to-beat estimation.  During the active strain phase (phase 2), group 1 showed a significant decrease in systolic blood pressure, SV and CO with reflex tachycardia; in group 2, there was a significant decrease in SV and CO with reflex tachycardia, but not systolic blood pressure.  The percentage decreases in SV and CO in group 2 were significantly less than those in group 1 (23 +/- 16 percent vs 48 +/- 10 percent for SV, p less than 0.01; 17 +/- 12 percent vs 40 +/- 13 percent for CO, p less than 0.05).  After release of strain phase (phase 4), group 1 showed significant reversed changes in systolic blood pressure, SV and heart rate, indicating an overshoot effect which was, however, not observed in group 2.  Thus, patients with ASD presented abnormal Valsalva response which was characterized by the absence of phase 4 overshoot and a less marked phase 2 change.  The findings suggest that the decremental effect of impaired venous return on stroke output during active strain may be attenuated by the increased pulmonary blood volume due to left-to-right shunt.  In patients with ASD, the lesser decrement of CO during phase 2 may not provoke sufficient sympathetic activity to induce overshoot response in phase 4.
Hemodynamic status in critically ill patients with and without acute heart disease.  Physicians have been urged to reduce the use of the pulmonary artery catheter.  However, there are no guidelines to help the clinician make the decision to use or withhold invasive monitoring in the individual patient.  This study was designed to examine the accuracy of physician estimates of cardiac function in a spectrum of patients with hemodynamic instability to determine whether differences in accuracy among subgroups would suggest subgroups of patients who could be managed without invasive measurements.  Physician estimates of cardiac index were found to be sufficiently accurate in patients without acute heart disease that initial management without invasive monitoring may be appropriate in selected cases.  However, due to the general inaccuracy of physician estimates, efforts to improve the accuracy of clinical judgments of cardiac function and hemodynamic status should be pursued with vigor in patients both with and without acute cardiac dysfunction.
A randomized trial comparing direct current therapy and bipolar diathermy in the outpatient treatment of third-degree hemorrhoids.  Fifty patients with third-degree hemorrhoids were randomized to receive outpatient treatment with either bipolar diathermy or direct current therapy.  Direct current therapy was used to treat 26 patients and bipolar diathermy was used to treat 24 patients.  Twenty patients in each group were successfully treated as judged by resolution of symptoms and shrinkage of hemorrhoidal tissue.  Both treatments are effective in the outpatient management of large, prolapsing hemorrhoids.  Bipolar diathermy is less time consuming and better tolerated.
Short-term effect of hepatic arterial versus portal venous reperfusion on energy levels of liver tissue.  The hepatic artery and the portal vein blood vary in flow, oxygenation, and hormonal content.  It was uncertain which blood supply has a greater effect on the recuperative process of the hepatocytes in the ischemic liver during the initial reperfusion.  The ability of the liver cells to restore its energy phosphates is related to the viability of the liver.  This study was designed to determine the differences of the high energy phosphate in the liver predicated upon whether reflow was first provided by either the hepatic artery or the portal vein followed by subsequent reperfusion from both vessels.  The recovery of ATP upon 10 min of only hepatic arterial reperfusion after 15 min of total ischemia was much slower compared to the portal venous reperfusion only.  It may be undesirable, therefore, to reperfuse the liver with hepatic arterial blood first immediately after warm liver ischemia.
Arterial blood oxygen desaturation in infants and children during upper gastrointestinal endoscopy.  Arterial blood oxygen desaturation and abnormal electrocardiographic changes have been reported in adults undergoing upper gastrointestinal endoscopy.  We studied 32 infants and children less than 12 years of age using pulse oximetry and continuous electrocardiography before, during, and after upper gastrointestinal endoscopy performed under intravenous sedation.  Sinus tachycardia was the most common electrocardiographic change, and no clinically significant electrocardiographic abnormalities were induced by the procedure.  Desaturation to less than or equal to 90% was found in 37.5% of the patients and was most commonly noted during the endoscopy procedure and in patients with cardiopulmonary disease.  The desaturation was unpredictable because there was no correlation between desaturation and medication, tolerance to the procedure, weight, or age of the child.  Some patients who subjectively appeared to tolerate the procedure well had significant desaturation.  The use of pulse oximetry should be considered for all children undergoing upper gastrointestinal endoscopy.
Characteristics of biliary lipid metabolism after liver transplantation.  Biliary lipid metabolism was studied after 10 liver transplantations with continuous drainage of bile.  Within 3 wk after transplantation, the new liver produced bile with concentrations of biliary lipids in agreement with those reported for T-tube bile in cholecystectolized nontransplanted subjects.  Although changes in biliary lipid composition occurred swiftly in response to various forms of disturbed liver function, they did not provide substantially more information than did standard serum tests or simple measurements of bile flow in most patients.  Secretion rates of phospholipids and cholesterol were found to be completely bile acid dependent.  For each micromole of bile acids, 0.22 and 0.08 mumol of phospholipids and cholesterol were secreted, respectively.  When bile flow was related to bile acid output, a linear relationship was found (r = 0.89), with a positive intercept indicating a bile acid-independent bile flow of approximately 44 microliters/min.  Analysis of individual bile acids showed almost exclusively primary bile acids.  The relative proportion of chenodeoxycholic acid was more prominent during the first days after transplantation.  Different explanations for this are discussed.
Early 24-hour blood pressure elevation in normotensive subjects with parental hypertension   Subjects with a family history of parental hypertension are reported to have a slightly higher office blood pressure in the prehypertensive stage.  Whether this reflects a hyperreactivity to blood pressure measurement or a more permanent blood pressure elevation, however, is not known.  In the present study, blood pressure was measured in 15 normotensive subjects whose parents are both hypertensive (FH++), 15 normotensive subjects with one hypertensive parent (FH(+)-), and 15 normotensive subjects whose parents are not hypertensive (FH--); among the three groups, subjects were matched for age, sex, and body mass index.  The measurements were made in the office during a variety of laboratory stressors and during a prolonged resting period, and for a 24-hour period (ambulatory blood pressure monitoring).  Office blood pressure was higher in the FH++ group than in the FH-- group (p less than 0.05).  The pressor responses to laboratory stressors were similar in the two groups, but the FH++ group had higher prolonged resting and 24-hour blood pressure than the FH-- group; the difference was always significant (p less than 0.05) for systolic blood pressure.  The FH++ group also had a greater left ventricular mass index (on echocardiographic examination) than the FH-- group (p less than 0.01).  The blood pressure values and echocardiographic values of the FH(+)- group tended to be between those of the other two groups.  Thus, the higher blood pressure shown by individuals in the prehypertensive stage with a family history of parental hypertension does not reflect a hyperreactivity to stress but an early permanent blood pressure elevation.
Calcitropic hormones, platelet calcium, and blood pressure in essential hypertension.  Plasma ionized calcium, platelet cytosolic calcium (using the fura-2 method in gel-filtered platelets), parathyroid hormone (both the intact hormone and a midmolecule portion), calcitriol, and calcidiol were measured in 19 untreated male patients with essential hypertension and 19 age-matched normotensive male research subjects.  Mean levels of platelet cytosolic calcium, parathyroid hormone, calcitriol, and calcidiol were all significantly higher, whereas plasma ionized calcium was significantly lower, in the hypertensive group compared with the normotensive group.  Both platelet cytosolic calcium and intact parathyroid hormone were positively correlated with mean arterial pressure (r = 0.58, p less than 0.001; r = 0.54, p less than 0.001, respectively), whereas plasma ionized calcium was inversely correlated with mean arterial pressure (r = -0.60, p less than 0.001) in the combined group of all study subjects.  All three of these correlations were significant in the hypertensive group alone but not in the normotensive group alone.  When analyzed with plasma ionized calcium, body mass index, serum calcitriol, and calcidiol in a multivariable regression model, the significance of the partial regressions of platelet cytosolic calcium and parathyroid hormone with mean arterial pressure persisted.  Intact parathyroid hormone was positively correlated to platelet cytosolic calcium (r = 0.43, p less than 0.01) and plasma ionized calcium was inversely correlated to platelet cytosolic calcium (r = -0.44, p less than 0.01).  These results confirm previous reports of disturbances of calcium metabolism in essential hypertension and suggest that the elevated platelet cytosolic calcium observed in essential hypertension may be linked to one or more of these alterations of calcium metabolism.
Effects of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and of hydralazine on endothelial function in hypertensive rats   The function of the endothelium is impaired in hypertension.  In spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR), acetylcholine-induced relaxation is decreased and serotonin-induced constriction is increased.  The goal of our study was to evaluate the effect of a long-term treatment with cilazapril, a new angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, or hydralazine, a vasodilator, on the endothelium-dependent responses in aorta of SHR.  Wistar-Kyoto rats were used as normotensive reference.  Isolated aortic rings with or without endothelium were suspended in organ chambers.  The rings with intact endothelium were contracted with norepinephrine.  Acetylcholine-induced relaxation was markedly enhanced by cilazapril treatment.  The tension achieved at maximal relaxation was 8 +/- 4% of norepinephrine contraction in the cilazapril-treated SHR versus 55 +/- 5% in the untreated SHR (p less than 0.001).  Hydralazine had no significant effect.  The effect of serotonin was also markedly modified by cilazapril.  In untreated SHR, serotonin induced the release of a vasoconstrictor substance by the endothelium as assessed by the ratio of maximal tension induced by serotonin in rings with endothelium over maximal tension in rings without endothelium, which was greater than 1.  This ratio was reversed in cilazapril-treated SHR but not in hydralazine-treated SHR.  Captopril had effects similar to cilazapril.  Finally, evaluation of carotid arteries showed that cilazapril also prevented morphological changes of the intima in SHR (i.e., infiltration by mononuclear cells).  We conclude that angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors prevent the functional and morphological alterations in endothelium that are found in hypertension and speculate that this action might participate in their antihypertensive effect.
Pressor systems in hypertension and congestive heart failure. Role of vasopressin [clinical conference]  Elevated peripheral vascular resistance, which characterizes hypertension and congestive heart failure (the latter regardless of absolute blood pressure level) is maintained to a large extent by the combined effects of three major neurohormonal pressor mechanisms: the renin-angiotensin system, the sympathoadrenal system, and arginine vasopressin.  Blockade of one of these mechanisms may lead to compensatory stimulation of the others, thus offsetting in part the hemodynamic benefits of a specific intervention.  Combination therapy, designed to attack all three systems (with use of an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, a sympathetic blocker such as clonidine, and an antagonist of the vasopressor action of vasopressin), may help in the treatment of such cases.  To illustrate this strategy, two experimental studies, one case of malignant hypertension, and one case of congestive heart failure are presented.
Clinical controversies surrounding thrombolytic therapy in acute myocardial infarction.  The treatment of acute myocardial infarction has changed tremendously in the past decade because thrombolytic therapy has become the treatment of choice for the patient with acute myocardial infarction.  Although many issues have been resolved, several controversial issues remain unresolved.  This article addresses thrombolytic agents in terms of their superiority in achieving infarct vessel patency and mortality reduction as well as the role of thrombolysis in patients who present with chest pain of greater than 6 hours' duration, who are elderly, and who have an inferior infarction.
Effects of heparin versus saline solution on intermittent infusion device irrigation.  The purpose of this study was to compare the effectiveness of 1 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride with 10 units of heparin in 1 ml sodium chloride solution, both containing benzyl alcohol, in maintaining patency and reducing the incidence of phlebitis in patients with intermittent infusion devices.  The subjects (N = 32) were randomly assigned in a double-blind experimental design.  Repeated-measures analysis of variance revealed no significant difference between the groups in phlebitis or patency variables.  The results from this controlled study would suggest that 0.9% sodium chloride is as effective as 10 units of heparin in sodium chloride solution in maintaining intermittent infusion device patency and preventing phlebitis.
Effects of anxiety on family members of patients with cardiac disease learning cardiopulmonary resuscitation.  The effects of anxiety on learning cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) by family members of patients with cardiac disease was examined.  Family members of hospitalized patients (n = 17), family members of nonhospitalized patients (n = 12), and a control group (n = 21) all took one of nine Heart Saver programs in which CPR was taught and performance evaluated.  Subjects took the State Anxiety Inventory three times: immediately before the program, immediately after the performance test, and 2 months after completion of the program.  Family members of hospitalized patients had significantly higher before-program anxiety scores than the other groups.  This difference was not present immediately after the program or 2 months later.  Family members of hospitalized patients showed a significant decline in anxiety over the three testing times.  These outcomes support the benefit of teaching CPR to this group.
Left ventricular asynchrony in patients with pulmonary hypertension.  Left ventricular regional wall motion was evaluated in 11 patients with pulmonary hypertension and 18 control subjects.  All 11 patients had secondary pulmonary hypertension and less than 20% measured diameter stenosis in any vessel.  This study utilizes a video-intensity-based frame-by-frame computerized technique.  All pulmonary hypertensive patients showed early diastolic asynchrony in the anterior or apical regions that lasted 100-200 ms.  The size of the abnormal area varied from 2 to 20% of the ventricular silhouette.  Four patients also showed systolic abnormalities.  No abnormalities were detected in the control group.  The cause of the asynchrony detected in pulmonary hypertension is probably due to interventricular interaction caused by pressure gradients across the septum.
Muscle oxidative capacity and work performance after training under local leg ischemia.  Healthy young men executed supine one-legged cycle training four times per week for 4 wk with legs and the cycle ergometer inside a pressure chamber, the opening of which was sealed by a rubber membrane at the level of the crotch.  Each training session started by training one leg under ischemic conditions induced by increased chamber pressure (50 mmHg) at the highest intensity tolerable for 45 min.  Then the other leg was trained with the same power profile but normal atmospheric chamber pressure.  Before and after the training period, both legs executed one-legged exercise tests under both normal and increased chamber pressure and muscle biopsies were taken from the vastus lateralis.  Ischemic training increased performance more than normal training, the difference being greater for exercise executed under ischemic conditions.  The difference in performance increase between the legs was paralleled by a greater muscle citrate synthase activity in the ischemically than in the normally trained leg.
Surgical treatment of aneurysm or dissection involving the ascending aorta and aortic arch, utilizing circulatory arrest and retrograde cerebral perfusion.  Recently we replaced the ascending aorta and aortic arch in 8 patients with aneurysm or dissection, using profound hypothermic circulatory arrest with retrograde cerebral perfusion.  There were no operative deaths.  Open aortic anastomosis facilitated repair of the aortic arch without clamping the arch tributaries, and embolism due to particulate debris from clamping of the arch vessels was eliminated.  Retrograde cerebral perfusion during profound hypothermic circulatory arrest is a simplified technique that may protect the brain.  This method offers advantages over previously described methods, particularly in obviating dissection of the arch tributaries and the clamping thereof, and in protecting the central nervous system.
The effect of enoximone and dobutamine on hemodynamic performance after open heart surgery. A clinical comparison.  In a prospective, randomized study the phosphodiesterase inhibitor enoximone was compared to dobutamine after open heart surgery.  In either group 25 patients were treated with enoximone and dobutamine, respectively, beginning immediately after weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass until 4 hours postoperatively.  The drug was administered as a continuous infusion of 5 micrograms/min/kg body weight.  Under enoximone a significant increase of cardiac output [enoximone (E): + 100%; dobutamine (D): + 38%] and a significant decrease of pulmonary vascular resistance (E: -34%, D: +65%) and of total systemic vascular resistance (E: -59%, D: -7%) was achieved.  Systemic blood pressure and heart rate were not different.  Side effects were not observed.  Enoximone proved to be safe and superior to dobutamine in low cardiac output states after open heart surgery.
Valvular and coronary surgery in renal transplant patients.  The Authors report aortic valvular replacement (AVR) and coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) successfully performed in two renal transplant patients.  The postoperative blood urea and creatinine levels were comparable to the preoperative values.  The first patient underwent isolated AVR.  The second patient had an initial AVR combined with CABG followed two years later by a further AVR for prosthetic dysfunction.  For many reasons, coronary artery (CAD) and valvular diseases are not uncommon in renal transplant patients.  Cardiac surgery is feasible without impairment of the renal function provided some precautions are taken, ie good mean perfusion pressure during cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), adequate volume replacement, and selected use of mannitol and dopamine.
Successful surgical treatment of subaortic stenosis caused by an accessory mitral valve.  A 22-month-old boy with subaortic stenosis was found to have relatively mature mitral valve tissue beneath the aortic valve, associated with a hypertrophic and prominent interventricular septum.  This tissue caused obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract and resulted in a pressure gradient of 70 mmHg between the aorta and the left ventricle.  Surgical treatment was successfully performed to excise the tissue and part of the hypertrophic ventricular septum.  Results of microscopic examination of the resected specimen are shown and discussed.
Assessment of major venous anomalies by computerized tomography.  Congenital anomalies of major venous structures are not common but their identification and relative position, particularly in relation to an abdominal aortic aneurysm, are of significant value in planning and conducting aortic operations.  Computed tomography (CT) has become a common method of preoperative evaluation of aortic disease.  Its reliability in providing accurate information regarding aneurysmal size, configuration, and extension, as well as the presence of intraluminal thrombus and involvement of the renal and iliac arteries, has been demonstrated.  Simultaneous visualization of the major adjacent venous structures with the use of contrast enhancement is obtained, but anatomic variants can be overlooked because they are commonly subtle and considered incidental.  The preoperative diagnosis of these venous abnormalities is significant to the vascular surgeon.  Such information can be accurately and reliably acquired with the present CT techniques without the need for further diagnostic studies.
Primary varicose veins: topographic and hemodynamic correlations.  This study was conducted to correlate the clinical presentations of uncomplicated primary varicose veins with the topographic and anatomic source of reflux (escape points).  One-hundred sixty-three patients with primary varicose veins (144 females, 19 males; 96 unilateral, 67 bilateral) in 230 involved limbs were examined.  The origin and extent of venous reflux was traced with Doppler ultrasound.  Three distinct groups were recognized.  Group I.  Typical saphenous varicosities with junctional escapes occurred in 164 (71.3%).  Sapheno-femoral junction (SFJ) incompetence in 147, and sapheno-popliteal junction (SPJ) incompetence in 17 limbs.  Group II.  Atypical saphenous varicosities with non-junctional escapes occurred in 51 (22.17%) limbs.  In 5 limbs, no escape was detected.  Twenty-two limbs had escapes localized in the main perforators: mid-thigh perforator 17, upper calf 2, distal ankle in 3.  Twenty-four limbs had their escapes in the auxiliary perforators: abdomino-pelvic 17, and circumflex iliac/external epigastric, 7 limbs.  Group III.  Non saphenous (lateral venous system) varicosities occurred in 15 (6.52%) limbs.  Based on physical examination alone, 55 limbs would possibly have undergone unnecessary ankle to groin stripping and 83 limbs an unnecessary SFJ ligation.  Doppler US is an essential diagnostic tool that can accurately map the origin and extent of the venous reflux.  The obtained hemodynamic information will permit more selective, multimodal therapy and avoid the indiscriminate, often unnecessary stripping of the entire saphenous system in all cases of primary varicose veins.
Alterations in aldosterone secretion and metabolism in low renin hypertension.  Low renin essential hypertensives (LRH) have normal plasma aldosterone levels which are inappropriately high in relation to their PRA.  Posture is the major determinant for plasma aldosterone and PRA levels, but it is not known whether postural increments (delta) of plasma aldosterone and (delta) PRA are also abnormal in LRH.  To evaluate this, LRH (n = 8), normal renin hypertensives (NRH; n = 9), normotensive controls (n = 18), and subjects with idiopathic hyperaldosteronism (IHA; n = 5) were studied in a metabolic unit on a controlled diet over 7 days.  Overnight supine and 4-h upright PRA, plasma aldosterone, and 24-h urinary tetrahydroaldosterone (THA) and aldosterone secretion rates (ASR) were measured.  The delta in plasma aldosterone after 4 h of upright posture was not different in the four groups.  The ratio of delta plasma aldosterone/delta PRA, however, was elevated in both IHA and LRH compared to that in NRH and normals.  THA excretion was also elevated in IHA and LRH, but LRH had a normal ASR.  This resulted in a higher fractional THA excretion (THA/ASR) in LRH compared to the other three groups.  These data further support enhanced adrenal angiotensin-II sensitivity in LRH.  Aldosterone was preferentially metabolized to THA in LRH.  Since THA has reduced biological activity, this may be a compensatory mechanism to reduce mineralocorticoid activity in LRH.
Endothelin family in human plasma and cerebrospinal fluid.  To clarify whether endothelin may be present in human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and, if it exists, to compare its molecular forms with those of endothelin in human plasma, we analyzed pooled human CSF and plasma by high performance liquid chromatography with specific enzyme immunoassays for each endothelin peptide.  Of the four human endothelin peptides hitherto identified, big endothelin-1 was the major molecular form of endothelin present in human CSF.  In addition, there was a small but significant amount of endothelin-1 and endothelin-3 in CSF, while endothelin-2 was not detectable.  Similarly, big endothelin-1, endothelin-1, and endothelin-3 were identified in human plasma.  Although big endothelin-1 was the most abundant, a substantial amount of endothelin-1 and endothelin-3 was found in plasma with a resultant lower molar ratio of big endothelin-1 to endothelin-1 than in CSF.  In all CSF samples from 17 patients requiring diagnostic lumbar puncture or lumbar anesthesia, endothelin was detectable, with a preponderance of big endothelin-1 relative to endothelin-1 and endothelin-3.  The mean concentrations of endothelin-1 and endothelin-3 in simultaneously collected plasma were significantly (P less than 0.01) higher than those in CSF, while there was no significant difference between the mean big endothelin-1 concentration in plasma and that in CSF.  There was no significant correlation among concentrations of big endothelin-1, endothelin-1, and endothelin-3 in each paired sample.  These results indicate that endothelin is present in human CSF that is differently processed from endothelin in vascular endothelial cells and suggest a possible role for endothelin as a modulator of neuronal functions.
Coronary Artery Surgery Study (CASS): comparability of 10 year survival in randomized and randomizable patients.  The Coronary Artery Surgery Study (CASS) includes 780 patients with mild or moderate stable angina pectoris or asymptomatic survivors of a myocardial infarction who were randomized to either medical or surgical therapy and 1,319 patients who were eligible for randomization but were not randomized (randomizable patients).  There were no substantial aggregate differences observed in any of the survival comparisons after 10 years of follow-up study between the randomized and randomizable patients assigned to the medical (79% versus 80%) or surgical (82% versus 81%) groups or in patient subgroups stratified according to coronary artery disease extent and left ventricular ejection fraction.  Cox regression analyses were done with independent variables known to be predictors of survival, including surgical versus medical therapy and randomized versus randomizable group, to test the null hypothesis of a mortality difference between medical versus surgical assignment according to group assignment (randomized versus randomizable).  In no case did the initial group category enter as a significant predictor of survival.  The results in the randomizable group reinforce those in the randomized group with respect to the medical versus surgical comparison.  Two subgroups are identified with a significant surgical advantage: 1) patients with proximal left anterior descending coronary artery stenosis greater than or equal to 70% and an ejection fraction less than 0.50, and 2) patients with three vessel coronary artery disease and an ejection fraction less than 0.50.  In both groups, coronary bypass surgery had a statistically significant beneficial effect on survival (p less than 0.05).  After a decade of follow-up, the CASS randomizable patients confirm conclusions reached on the basis of the CASS randomized trial.
Coronary lesion morphology in acute myocardial infarction: demonstration of early remodeling after streptokinase treatment   Coronary lesion morphology was analyzed in 72 patients 1 to 8 days after streptokinase treatment for acute myocardial infarction and compared with lesion morphology in a control group of 24 patients with stable angina.  In the streptokinase group the infarct-related artery was patent in 55 patients (76%).  Compared with stenoses in the stable angina group, there were no differences in the stenosis length, severity, calcification or in the proportion located at an acute bend or at a branch point.  However, lesions in the streptokinase group were more often irregular (p less than 0.005) and eccentric (p less than 0.01), had a shoulder (p less than 0.0001), globular filling defects (p less than 0.01), linear filling defects (p less than 0.00005) and contrast staining (p less than 0.05).  Plaque ulceration index was higher in the streptokinase than in the stable angina group (6.2 +/- 7.9 versus 3.5 +/- 3.4, p less than 0.001).  Of the 72 streptokinase-treated patients, 35 were maintained on heparin infusion until angioplasty 2 to 10 days later.  At repeat angiography before angioplasty, globular lesion filling defects seen in eight patients had disappeared, whereas linear filling defects persisted in 7 of 14 cases.  Fewer lesions were irregular (p less than 0.0001) and the ulceration index decreased from 7.4 +/- 10.4 to 3.0 +/- 1.6 (p less than 0.001).  These data show that the lesion in the infarct-related artery after streptokinase treatment is irregular and often associated with filling defects, perhaps corresponding to plaque fissuring and intraluminal thrombosis.
Clinical and hemodynamic correlates of sympathetic nerve activity in normal humans and patients with heart failure: evidence from direct microneurographic recordings.  To characterize the neural excitatory state of heart failure, simultaneous measurements of efferent sympathetic nerve activity to muscle (by microneurography) and rest hemodynamics were obtained in 10 normal subjects (age 25 +/- 2 years, mean +/- SEM) and 29 patients with heart failure (age 49 +/- 2 years; New York Heart Association functional class II to IV; left ventricular ejection fraction 21 +/- 1%; cardiac index = 2.16 +/- 0.13 liters/min per m2; pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 23 +/- 2 mm Hg).  Sympathetic nerve activity was significantly higher in the patients with heart failure (54.7 +/- 4.5 bursts/min) than in normal subjects (16.7 +/- 2.2 bursts/min, p less than 0.001).  Multiple linear regression analyses indicated that sympathetic activity in these human subjects was most strongly and inversely correlated with left ventricular stroke work index (r = -0.86, p less than 0.0001) and stroke volume index (r = -0.85, p less than 0.0001).  There was a strong positive correlation between sympathetic nerve activity and pulmonary artery diastolic (r = 0.82, p less than 0.0001) and mean (r = 0.81, p less than 0.0001) pressures.  Similar correlations were seen when patients with heart failure were analyzed separately.  There was no significant correlation between sympathetic nerve activity and mean arterial pressure, left ventricular ejection fraction (by radionuclide ventriculography), cardiac chamber size (by echocardiography) or arterial oxygen tension in the patients with heart failure.  Direct measurements of sympathetic nerve activity correlated closely with plasma norepinephrine (r = 0.72, p less than 0.0001) in patients with heart failure.  Thus, sympathetic nerve activity at rest parallels impairment of cardiac performance in patients with heart failure.
Simultaneous transesophageal atrial pacing and transesophageal two-dimensional echocardiography: a new method of stress echocardiography   The diagnostic use of exercise echocardiography has been widely reported.  However, transthoracic exercise echocardiography is inadequate in up to 20% of patients because of poor image quality related to exercise.  In an attempt to overcome these limitations, a system was developed in which transesophageal echocardiography is combined with simultaneous transesophageal atrial pacing by means of the same probe.  In a prospective study, transesophageal echocardiography was performed before, during and immediately after maximal atrial pacing in 50 patients with suspected coronary artery disease.  Results of transesophageal stress echocardiography were considered abnormal when new pacing-induced regional wall motion abnormalities were observed.  Correlative routine bicycle exercise testing was carried out in 44 patients.  Cardiac catheterization was performed in all patients.  The success rate in obtaining high quality diagnostic images was 100% by transesophageal echocardiography.  All nine patients without angiographic evidence of coronary artery disease had a normal result on the transesophageal stress echocardiogram (100% specificity).  Thirty-eight of 41 patients with coronary artery disease (defined as greater than or equal to 50% luminal diameter narrowing of at least one major vessel) had an abnormal result on the transesophageal stress echocardiogram (93% sensitivity).  The sensitivity of the technique for one, two or three vessel disease was 85%, 100% and 100%, respectively, compared with 44%, 50% and 83%, respectively, for bicycle exercise testing; the 12 lead electrocardiogram (ECG) during rapid atrial pacing showed a sensitivity of 25%, 64% and 86%, respectively.  Thus, rapid atrial pacing combined with simultaneous transesophageal echocardiography is a highly specific and sensitive technique for the detection of coronary artery disease.  Ischemia-induced wall motion abnormalities were detected earlier than observed ECG changes.  The technique appears to be particularly suited to patients who are unable to perform an active stress test or those with poor quality transthoracic echocardiograms.
Dynamic positron tomographic imaging with nitrogen-13 glutamate in patients with coronary artery disease: comparison with nitrogen-13 ammonia and fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose imaging.  This study was designed to test the usefulness of nitrogen-13 (N-13) glutamate imaging with positron emission tomography in defining myocardial ischemia in humans.  Seventeen patients who had undergone coronary arteriography were studied with N-13 glutamate at peak supine exercise using a bicycle ergometer, as well as with the flow tracer N-13 ammonia at peak exercise during a second similar exercise test.  Six of the patients also underwent imaging with N-13 glutamate at rest before exercise testing; in the remaining 11 patients imaging with fluorine-18 (F-18) fluorodeoxyglucose was performed to assess glucose metabolism after the second exercise test.  Seven patients had classic metabolism-flow mismatches consistent with ischemia (that is, decreased N-13 ammonia uptake in a region with relatively increased F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose uptake).  There was no evidence of increased N-13 glutamate uptake in the ischemic mismatched regions in any of these patients.  In all 17 patients, the uptake of N-13 glutamate during exercise paralleled the uptake of N-13 ammonia during exercise, suggesting that N-13 glutamate behaves as a flow tracer rather than as a metabolic marker of ischemia in humans.
Effects of nitroprusside on transmitral flow velocity patterns in extreme heart failure: a combined hemodynamic and Doppler echocardiographic study of varying loading conditions.  To explore the mechanisms of change of left ventricular diastolic filling associated with preload and afterload reduction, the influence of nitroprusside on the transmitral flow velocity pattern, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and left ventricular pressure interaction was studied in 11 patients with end-stage heart failure.  Pulsed Doppler echocardiographic recordings of mitral inflow were obtained with simultaneous high fidelity left ventricular and phase-corrected pulmonary capillary wedge pressure recordings before and during levels of nitroprusside infusion.  With nitroprusside, left ventricular systolic and end-diastolic pressures decreased by 14% and 41% (p less than 0.05, p less than 0.05), respectively, and cardiac output increased by 67% (p less than 0.05).  The pulmonary capillary wedge-left ventricular crossover pressure decreased by 41% (p less than 0.05), but the time constant of isovolumetric left ventricular pressure decrease T was insignificantly changed.  Isovolumetric relaxation time and acceleration and deceleration times of the early diastolic filling wave were significantly prolonged with nitroprusside infusion (p less than 0.05, p less than 0.05 and p less than 0.05, respectively).  Peak early diastolic filling velocity was maintained (65 +/- 11 to 62 +/- 13 cm/s, p = NS) in spite of the decreased absolute crossover pressure.  Changes in peak early diastolic filling velocity correlated weakly with changes in the crossover pressure (r = 0.48, p less than 0.05) and correlated better with the crossover to left ventricular minimal pressure difference (r = 0.78, p less than 0.05).  Peak early diastolic filling velocity appears to be most affected by the early diastolic pulmonary capillary wedge to left ventricular pressure difference rather than the absolute pulmonary capillary wedge pressure.  The lack of peak flow velocity change during nitroprusside infusion could be explained by either the associated decrease in left ventricular minimal pressure or downward shift of left ventricular diastolic pressure by the same amount as the decrease in pulmonary capillary wedge pressure.  This may reflect a reduction of external constraint to ventricular distensibility produced by a reduction in filling volume in patients with a markedly dilated ventricle.  Thus, a prolonged early diastolic filling period and preserved peak early diastolic filling velocity in spite of decreased left ventricular filling pressure and constant relaxation rate are associated with the beneficial effects of nitroprusside on left ventricular function in patients with severe congestive heart failure.
Determinants of the ventricular rate during atrial fibrillation.  Determinants of the ventricular cycle length during atrial fibrillation were examined in 52 patients.  Thirty-three patients had structural heart disease and none had an accessory atrioventricular (AV) connection.  The AV node effective and functional refractory periods, the shortest atrial pacing cycle length associated with 1:1 conduction, the AV node conduction time and indexes of concealed conduction in the AV node were measured in the baseline state (36 patients) and after modification of sympathetic tone by infusion of isoproterenol or propranolol (8 patients each).  Atrial fibrillation was then induced with rapid atrial pacing, and the mean, shortest and longest ventricular cycle lengths were measured.  Variables that correlated most strongly with the mean RR interval during atrial fibrillation were the AV node effective refractory period (r = 0.93; p less than 0.001), AV node functional refractory period (r = 0.87; p less than 0.001) and shortest atrial pacing cycle length associated with 1:1 conduction (r = 0.91; p less than 0.001).  The AH interval during sinus rhythm (r = 0.74; p less than 0.001) and during atrial pacing at the shortest cycle length with 1:1 conduction (r = 0.52; p less than 0.001) had weaker correlations.  Measures of concealed conduction did not improve the prediction of the mean or longest ventricular cycle length during atrial fibrillation.  In conclusion, the refractory periods and conductivity of the AV node are the best indicators of the potential of the node to transmit atrial impulses to the ventricles during atrial fibrillation.  The degree of concealed conduction in the AV node is a less important determinant of the mean ventricular rate during atrial fibrillation.
Efficacy of propafenone in preventing ventricular tachycardia: inverse correlation with rate-related prolongation of conduction time   The efficacy of propafenone in preventing induction of ventricular tachycardia was evaluated in 25 consecutive patients (mean age 62 +/- 8 years) with remote myocardial infarction who underwent programmed electrical stimulation for ventricular arrhythmia using up to three extra-stimuli after basic drive at the right ventricular apex.  In nine patients (Group A), propafenone prevented induction of sustained ventricular tachycardia (noninducible in four, nonsustained [less than 30 s] in five).  In the other 16 patients (Group B), sustained ventricular tachycardia was still inducible; in 11 of the 16, the tachycardia configuration was unchanged but the cycle length was significantly longer (431 +/- 99 versus 284 +/- 44 ms, p less than 0.001).  Propafenone did not significantly affect either sinus cycle length or AH and HV intervals.  However, it prolonged QRS duration during sinus rhythm equally in both groups of patients.  With ventricular pacing, propafenone also prolonged right ventricular effective and functional refractory periods and surface QRS duration.  There was greater lengthening of the paced surface QRS duration when drug therapy was ineffective (for example, +35 +/- 12 ms in Group A versus +69 +/- 23 ms in Group B at a basic drive of 400 ms, p less than 0.01).  Drug-induced prolongation of a paced QRS complex greater than 40 ms had a 94% positive predictive value for drug failure to prevent induction of ventricular tachycardia.  Drug-induced percent prolongation of ventricular tachycardia cycle length in Group B did not correlate well with percent QRS prolongation.
Magnitude and time course of beta-adrenergic antagonism during oral amiodarone therapy.  To examine the presence and time course of beta-adrenergic antagonism produced by amiodarone, the heart rate, QT interval and arrhythmia frequency in response to graded doses of isoproterenol were evaluated in eight patients treated with oral amiodarone for sustained ventricular tachycardia.  Measurements were made before and every 2 days after beginning oral amiodarone therapy (600 mg twice daily).  Isoproterenol was given in doses of 12.5, 25 and 50 ng/kg body weight per min.  The mean heart rate at rest decreased from 73.1 +/- 17.8 beats/min on day 0 to 57.8 +/- 15.0 beats/min after 12 days of amiodarone therapy.  A significant linear decline in heart rate at rest was observed until day 6 (p less than 0.05 for all comparisons).  On all days isoproterenol produced a progressive increase in heart rate that reached 115.5 +/- 20.2 beats/min on day 0 and 94.2 +/- 18.5 beats/min on day 12.  Amiodarone blunted the heart rate increase produced by isoproterenol on days 2 to 12 (p less than 0.05 versus day 0).  This effect was present by day 2 and did not change significantly thereafter.  The mean corrected QT (QTc) interval increased from 430 +/- 30 ms on day 0 to 449 +/- 63 ms on day 12.  A significant linear increase in QTc interval was observed until day 6 (p less than 0.05 for all comparisons).  There was no systematic effect of isoproterenol on the QTc interval.  Five of eight patients had a significant number of isoproterenol-induced premature ventricular complexes.  Ventricular ectopic activity in response to isoproterenol was abolished after 4 days of amiodarone therapy.
Surgical treatment of endomyocardial fibrosis: a new approach.  Endomyocardial fibrosis has been treated surgically for many years.  For complete removal of fibrosis from both ventricles by the classic technique, each atrioventricular (AV) valve was removed and replaced with a prosthesis.  Relapse of endomyocardial fibrosis has not been observed after surgical correction.  Reoperations have been carried out because of complications of valve prostheses.  A new surgical technique for removal of ventricular fibrous tissue with preservation of the mitral and tricuspid valves was used in nine consecutive patients with endomyocardial fibrosis.  Initial results show a reduction of pulmonary hypertension, mean right and left atrial pressures and end-diastolic pressures in both ventricles.  Tricuspid annuloplasty was performed in seven patients and mitral annuloplasty in five.  No valve prosthesis was used.  There was no death and New York Heart Association functional class improved from class III or IV in the preoperative period to class I or II in the postoperative period.  These data suggest that resection of endocardial fibrous tissue can be indicated early in the clinical course and performed with preservation of the AV valves.
Effect of intravenous streptokinase on the relation between initial ST-predicted size and final QRS-estimated size of acute myocardial infarcts.  Thrombolytic therapy has been documented to reduce acute myocardial infarct size.  The previously established relation between initial ST segment elevation and final electrocardiographic (ECG) myocardial infarct size in patients without coronary reperfusion might therefore be altered by thrombolytic therapy.  The effect of intravenous streptokinase on this relation was therefore studied in 73 patients with initial acute myocardial infarction who had participated in the Second International Study of Infarct Survival (ISIS-2).  Patients who received streptokinase were considered as one group and patients who did not receive streptokinase as a control group.  Final myocardial infarct size, which was estimated from the QRS score, was predicted from the admission standard ECG by previously developed formulas based on ST segment elevation.  In the 40 control patients there was no change from ST-predicted to final QRS-estimated infarct size (median 17.7% versus 18.3%; p = NS).  In the 33 patients in the streptokinase group, there was a highly significant decrease from predicted to final myocardial infarct size (median 21.9% versus 16.2%; p less than 0.0002).  This decrease was found for both anterior (median 23.7% versus 19.5%; p less than 0.03) and inferior (median 21.9% versus 12.0%; p = 0.001) infarct locations.  Multiple regression analysis adjusting for differences in predicted infarct size confirmed the significance of streptokinase on the difference in infarct size (p = 0.006).  Based on the variability of the percent change from predicted to final infarct size in the control group, a threshold decrease greater than or equal to 20% is required for identification of salvage.
Intraoperative assessment of regional myocardial perfusion using quantitative myocardial contrast echocardiography: an experimental evaluation.  To test the hypothesis that myocardial contrast echocardiography can be used to quantitate regional myocardial flow in the arrested heart at the time of delivery of cardioplegic solution, data were acquired in 13 dogs on cardiopulmonary bypass.  Different degrees of stenosis were placed in random order on the left anterior descending coronary artery.  For each stenosis, myocardial contrast echocardiography was performed by injecting sonicated albumin microbubbles into the cross-clamped aortic root at the time of delivery of cardioplegic solution.  The resultant echocardiographic images were analyzed on an off-line computer.  Background-subtracted time-intensity plots were generated, and an exponential function, f(t) = Ce-alpha t + De- beta t, was applied to each plot.  Variables that reflected the total number of microbubbles entering the coronary artery bed, such as the area under the curve and the peak height of the curve, correlated best with radiolabeled microsphere-measured myocardial flow (r = 0.92 and r = 0.91, respectively).  Variables that reflected the appearance of contrast microbubbles in the myocardium, such as the initial slope and the slope at 1 s, also had a good correlation with myocardial flow (r = 0.84 and r = 0.89, respectively).  Variables that reflected the washout of contrast medium from the myocardium, such as the slope of the descending portion of the curve, had only a fair correlation with myocardial flow (r = 0.65).  In six dogs, the technique of injecting contrast medium into the cross-clamped aortic root was also examined.  Although continuous infusion of contrast medium produced smaller perturbations in mean aortic and distal left anterior descending artery pressures compared with a bolus injection (p less than 0.01), the correlation between the variables of the time-intensity curves and flow was equally close with both techniques.  It is concluded that it is possible to quantitate myocardial flow by using myocardial contrast echocardiography at the time of delivery of cardioplegic solution in dogs on cardiopulmonary bypass.  The implementation of this technique in humans might be useful in guiding the sequence of graft placement and thereby improving myocardial preservation during coronary artery bypass operations.
Prostaglandin modulation of early afterdepolarizations and ventricular tachyarrhythmias induced by cesium chloride combined with efferent cardiac sympathetic stimulation in dogs.  Prostaglandins inhibit efferent cardiac sympathetic nerve effects by acting at presynaptic sites and may act to suppress some arrhythmias.  In the present study, the effects of intravenous administration of prostacyclin (PGI2) and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) on early afterdepolarizations and ventricular tachycardia induced by cesium chloride (0.5 mmol/liter per kg body weight intravenously) combined with stimulation of bilateral ansae subclaviae in anesthetized dogs were examined.  The right atrium was paced at a constant cycle length of 600 ms.  A left ventricular endocardial monophasic action potential catheter was used to detect early afterdepolarizations.  Prostacyclin (0.2 microgram/kg per min) reduced the amplitude of the early afterdepolarizations (39.2 +/- 8.4% of the monophasic action potential amplitude during control study to 28.7 +/- 5.5%, n = 10; p less than 0.001) as well as the prevalence of ventricular tachycardia (11 of 14 dogs during control study to 5 of 14 dogs; p = 0.031).  Prostaglandin E2 (0.2 to 0.6 microgram/kg per min) did not significantly reduce the early afterdepolarization amplitude (34.7 +/- 8.9% to 25.1 +/- 10.7%, n = 8; p = 0.085) or the prevalence of ventricular tachycardia (8 of 10 versus 6 of 10 dogs; p = 0.50).  Alpha- and beta-adrenoceptor blockade with combined intravenous administration of propranolol (0.5 mg/kg) and phentolamine (0.3 mg/kg) decreased the amplitude of the early afterdepolarizations induced by cesium chloride and bilateral ansae subclaviae stimulation from 38.6 +/- 11.2% to 18.8 +/- 3.3% (n = 6; p = 0.005).  Additional administration of PGI2 further reduced the early afterdepolarization amplitude from 18.8 +/- 3.3% to 9.8 +/- 4.8% (n = 6; p = 0.001).
Effects of calcium channel blockers on coronary vasoconstriction induced by endothelin-1 in closed chest pigs.  The purpose of this study was to determine the effects of endothelin-1 on the coronary vascular bed of closed chest pigs.  Endothelin-1 (3 to 30 pmol/kg body weight) was selectively administered into the left anterior descending coronary artery.  Coronary blood flow and epicardial vessel diameter were measured by quantitative arteriography.  Arterial pressure increased after a 30 pmol/kg dose and heart rate was not changed.  Coronary blood flow and vessel diameter of the left anterior descending artery significantly decreased by 74% and 32%, respectively (p less than 0.01 versus control) after the 30 pmol/kg dose, whereas these variables modestly decreased in the left circumflex artery.  Endothelin-1 in doses of 10 to 30 pmol/kg produced electrocardiographic ST segment elevation associated with decreased oxygen saturation of coronary sinus venous blood.  Endothelin-induced coronary vasoconstriction was significantly inhibited after treatment with intravenous diltiazem (0.2 mg/kg, n = 6) or nifedipine (0.1 mg/kg, n = 5), but not after vehicle administration (n = 4).  This study demonstrates that intracoronary administration of endothelin-1 causes significant myocardial ischemia through coronary vasoconstriction, which is inhibited by a calcium channel blocker.  The data suggest that calcium influx into the smooth muscle cells appears to be involved at least in part in the mechanism of endothelin-induced coronary vasoconstriction in vivo.
Transesophageal echocardiography to detect atrial clots in candidates for percutaneous transseptal mitral balloon valvuloplasty.  Left atrial thrombi are common in patients with mitral stenosis.  When percutaneous balloon mitral valvuloplasty is performed on such patients, there is a potential risk of thrombus dislodgment and embolization.  In this study conventional transthoracic echocardiography and transesophageal echocardiography were performed for percutaneous balloon mitral valvuloplasty on 19 consecutive candidates (6 men, 13 women, 23 to 81 years old).  In five patients (26%), transesophageal echocardiography revealed a left atrial thrombus; in only one of these was there a suspicion of left atrial thrombus on transthoracic echocardiography.  Balloon mitral valvuloplasty was canceled in four of the five patients.  Three underwent mitral valve surgery that confirmed the echocardiographic findings.  Transesophageal echocardiography is better than conventional transthoracic echocardiography in detecting left atrial clots in candidates for balloon mitral valvuloplasty.  Because of the potential risk of embolization, transesophageal echocardiography is recommended in all candidates for balloon mitral valvuloplasty.
Relation between beta-adrenergic blocker use, various correlates of left ventricular function and the chance of developing congestive heart failure. The Multicenter Diltiazem Post-Infarction Research Group.  This study examined the relations among beta-adrenergic blocker use, various correlates of left ventricular function and the chance of developing congestive heart failure in patients after myocardial infarction.  The study was performed with the placebo group of the Multicenter Diltiazem Post-Infarction Trial.  Ejection fraction data were available in 1,084 patients; of these, 557 were receiving a beta-blocker and 527 were not.  In addition to ejection fraction, other correlates of left ventricular function included the presence or absence of pulmonary rales, chest X-ray film evidence of pulmonary congestion and the presence of an S3 gallop.  Beta-blocker use was less frequent in patients with an ejection fraction less than 30%, rales, an S3 gallop and pulmonary congestion on chest X-ray film.  Twenty-one percent of patients with an ejection fraction less than 30%, 42% of patients with rales, 28% of patients with an S3 gallop and 28% of patients with pulmonary congestion were receiving beta-blocker therapy.  For every correlate of left ventricular function, the chance of developing congestive heart failure was greater in patients with diminished left ventricular function than in those without.  For each level of left ventricular function, the chance of developing congestive heart failure requiring treatment was greater in patients not taking a beta-blocker.
Single photon emission computed tomography with thallium-201 during adenosine-induced coronary hyperemia: correlation with coronary arteriography, exercise thallium imaging and two-dimensional echocardiography   The feasibility, safety and diagnostic accuracy of single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) with thallium-201 imaging during adenosine-induced coronary hyperemia were evaluated in 53 patients with and 7 without coronary artery disease proved by coronary angiography.  Adenosine was infused intravenously at a dose of 0.14 mg/kg body weight per min for 6 min and thallium was injected at 3 min.  Adenosine caused an increase in heart rate (68 +/- 12 at baseline versus 87 +/- 18 beats/min at peak effect, p less than 0.0001) but no change in blood pressure.  The sensitivity and specificity were 92% (95% confidence intervals 81% to 98%) and 100% (95% confidence intervals 59% to 100%), respectively; 20 (61%) of 33 patients with multivessel coronary artery disease were also correctly identified.  In 30 patients, the predictive accuracy of adenosine thallium imaging was slightly higher than that of exercise SPECT thallium imaging (90% versus 80%, p = NS) (95% confidence intervals 72% to 97% and 61% to 92%, respectively).  In 25 patients, two-dimensional echocardiography during adenosine infusion disclosed a new wall motion abnormality in 2 (10%) of 20 patients with coronary artery disease; 80% of these patients had reversible thallium defects (p less than 0.001).  Side effects were mild and transient; aminophylline was used in only three patients.  Thus, adenosine SPECT thallium imaging provides a high degree of accuracy in the diagnosis of coronary artery disease.  The results are comparable with those of exercise SPECT thallium imaging.  Most reversible defects in the adenosine study are not associated with any transient wall motion abnormality.
Termination of acute atrial fibrillation in the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome by procainamide and propafenone: importance of atrial fibrillatory cycle length.  The effects of intravenous procainamide (n = 30) or propafenone (n = 25) were evaluated in 55 patients with acute atrial fibrillation and the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.  All patients received either procainamide (12 to 15 mg/kg body weight) or propafenone (1 to 2 mg/kg) during sustained (greater than 10 min) atrial fibrillation or after termination of nonsustained atrial fibrillation.  Termination of atrial fibrillation was attributed to a drug if it occurred less than or equal to 15 min after infusion.  Measurements included mean cycle length of fibrillatory electrograms (mean AA interval) as measured at the high right atrium and shortest RR interval between pre-excited cycles during atrial fibrillation.  Atrial fibrillation terminated more frequently after procainamide administration (65%) than after propafenone (46%), although this difference was not significant.  Procainamide prolonged the shortest pre-excited RR interval (228 +/- 41 to 339 +/- 23 ms, p = 0.0001) as did propafenone (215 +/- 40 to 415 +/- 198 ms, p = 0.0001) and the magnitude of increase was greater for propafenone (p = 0.048).  Patients with sustained atrial fibrillation had shorter mean AA intervals than did their counterparts with nonsustained atrial fibrillation (123 +/- 25 versus 186 +/- 35 ms, p = 0.0001).  Termination of sustained atrial fibrillation by either drug was accompanied by prolongation of the mean AA interval but not necessarily by the shortest pre-excited RR interval.  Termination of atrial fibrillation was heralded by a 68% increase in the mean AA interval after procainamide administration compared with a 30% increase when the arrhythmia persisted.  For propafenone the increases were 90% and 68%, respectively.
Plaque morphology and pathologic changes in arteries from patients dying after coronary balloon angioplasty   Morphologic correlates of pathologic success or failure were studied at autopsy in 28 patients with 40 coronary arteries that had been subjected to balloon angioplasty.  The presence of the following histologic features was evaluated: plaque concentricity or eccentricity, calcification, fibrous or fibropultaceous plaque, medial disruption, luminal thrombus and inflammation.  Angioplasty was considered successful (residual cross-sectional luminal area greater than 25%) on pathologic examination in 14 arteries and unsuccessful in 26 arteries.  Eccentric plaques were more likely to be successfully dilated than were concentric lesions (p less than 0.05).  Six (50%) of 12 fibropultaceous plaques were successfully dilated compared with only 8 (29%) of 28 fibrous plaques.  Moderate to severe calcification did not preclude morphologic success.  Medial stretching or dissection, or both, was more often associated with a successful result.  Thus, plaque morphology may be an important determinant of pathologic outcome after coronary angioplasty.
Dissociation of changes in cardiovascular mass and performance with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in Wistar-Kyoto and spontaneously hypertensive rats.  The effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors on cardiovascular mass and function were measured in three groups of 22 week old male Wistar-Kyoto normotensive and spontaneously hypertensive rats treated with CGS-16617, cilazapril or quinapril.  Left ventricular performance was assessed by electromagnetic flow meter during rapid whole blood infusion before and after arterial pressure and increased abruptly with aortic snare; aortic distensibility also was assessed in vitro.  The systemic hemodynamic effects of these three agents were similar, yet their structural effects varied.  Although left ventricular and aortic masses diminished and right ventricular mass remained unchanged (with all three agents) in the spontaneously hypertensive rats, CGS-11617 and cilazapril also reduced left ventricular mass in the normotensive Wistar-Kyoto rats without changing aortic mass.  All three agents improved aortic distensibility whether or not mass was decreased.  Left ventricular structural changes were associated with variable changes in pumping ability.  These data show that reduced mass associated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor treatment was not consistent in ventricles and aorta, that a dissociation exists between structural and functional changes and that reduction of cardiac mass alone does not relate to changes in chamber mass or in function.  Thus, biologic and pharmacodynamic differences exist among angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors as well as between classes of antihypertensive agents.
Circulating heart-reactive antibodies in patients with myocarditis or cardiomyopathy [corrected and republished with original paging, article originally printed in J Am Coll Cardiol 1990 Oct;16(4):839-46]  Heart-reactive antibodies are commonly observed in patients with myocarditis or cardiomyopathy.  Such antibodies may be important in the pathogenesis of these disorders, yet the specific antigens recognized have not been studied systematically.  This report characterizes circulating heart autoantibodies from patients with myocarditis (n = 17) or idiopathic cardiomyopathy (n = 71) and from healthy volunteers (n = 15).  Indirect immunofluorescence demonstrated that high titer (greater than or equal to 1:20) immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody activity occurred in 59% of the myocarditis samples, 20% of the cardiomyopathy samples and none of the normal samples.  All samples were tested by Western immunoblotting for IgG activity against a normal human heart extract.  The number of antigens recognized by each sample was enumerated and the molecular weight of each antigen estimated; the prevalence of reactivity against antigens in selected molecular weight classes was determined.  There was no difference in the mean number of heart antigens recognized by serum from each group.  For most weight classes, prevalence either did not differ significantly among the various groups or subgroups or was greatest among samples from healthy volunteers.  Prevalence of reactivity with 190 to 199 kilodalton (kd) antigens was greatest (p less than 0.05) among low titer serum samples from patients with myocarditis.  High titer cardiomyopathy serum differed from normal serum by an increased (p less than 0.05) prevalence of antibodies to 40 to 49 and 100 to 109 kd antigens.  These results suggest that western immunostaining may ultimately contribute substantively to identifying patients with myocarditis or cardiomyopathy.
Diagnostic value of a new myocardial perfusion agent, teboroxime (SO 30,217), utilizing a rapid planar imaging protocol: preliminary results [corrected and republished with original paging, article originally printed in J Am Coll Cardiol 1990 Oct;16(4):855-61]  Technetium-99m-labeled agents have advantages over thallium-201 in terms of photon statistics, cost and clinical availability.  They have been suggested as an alternative to thallium for myocardial perfusion imaging.  Teboroxime is a new boronic acid adduct of technetium dioxime (BATO) compound that demonstrates favorable characteristics in preliminary studies.  With use of a novel (seated) patient positioning technique and a rapid dynamic acquisition protocol, 30 patients underwent planar imaging with teboroxoime while at rest and after maximal treadmill exercise.  Postexercise scans were completed in an average time (mean +/- SD) of 4.4 +/- 1.6 min, with 4.8 +/- 1.5 min for the views at rest.  These results were compared with coronary arteriography or thallium scintigraphy after treadmill exercise, or both.  Diagnostic agreement (abnormal versus normal) was present in 28 of the 30 patients (p less than 0.001).  Regarding physiologic assessment as compared with thallium scintigraphy, the finding of infarction and ischemia was concordant in 89% and 86% of patients, respectively.  This report describes the initial use of teboroxime with a rapid dynamic planar imaging technique, resulting in a high correlation with exercise thallium scintigraphy.  Delayed postexercise images obtained 5 to 10 min after exercise demonstrated rapid disappearance of exercise-induced defects noted on the initial (0 to 5 min) postexercise views.  The rapid differential washout with teboroxime has not been previously described and the possible clinical significance is discussed.
Plasma dehydroepiandrosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate in patients undergoing diagnostic coronary angiography [corrected and republished with original paging, article originally printed in J Am Coll Cardiol 1990 Oct;16(4):862-70]  Serum levels of DHEA sulfate are inversely associated with cardiovascular death in men, and urinary dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) levels are inversely associated with clinical manifestations of coronary artery disease.  These observations may be related to the antiproliferative effects of DHEA, resulting in inhibition of atherosclerotic intimal hyperplasia.  To examine the relation between these steroids and a direct measure of coronary atherosclerosis, plasma DHEA and DHEA sulfate levels were determined in 206 middle-aged patients (103 men, 103 women) undergoing elective coronary angiography.  Plasma DHEA sulfate levels were lower in men with at least one stenosis greater than or equal to 50% compared with those without any stenosis greater than or equal to 50% (4.9 +/- 2.7 versus 6.1 +/- 3.5 nmol/ml, p = 0.05).  Levels of DHEA sulfate were also inversely related to the number of diseased coronary vessels (r = -0.20, p = 0.05) and a continuous measure of the extent of coronary atherosclerosis (r = -0.25, p = 0.01) in men.  The association between DHEA sulfate levels and extent of coronary artery disease was independent of age and other conventional risk factors for coronary disease.  In women, there was no association between plasma DHEA or DHEA sulfate levels and coronary disease.  These data demonstrate a consistent, independent, inverse, dose-response relation between plasma DHEA sulfate levels and angiographically defined coronary atherosclerosis in men.  Plasma DHEA sulfate may be another important and potentially modifiable risk factor for the development and progression of coronary atherosclerosis.
Hypertension and acculturation in elderly Mexican Americans: results from 1982-84 Hispanic HANES.  The purpose of our study was to describe the relationship between acculturation and hypertension in elderly Mexican Americans.  Two age groups, 55-64 and 65-74, were examined from data provided in the Hispanic Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (HHANES).  The prevalence of hypertension among subgroups of different acculturation was ascertained based on the modified Cuellar Acculturation Scale.  Each age group was also stratified using the HHANES poverty index, with those above the index compared to those below.  A stepwise logistic regression was performed among the variables of poverty, gender, age, and acculturation in relation to hypertension.  The results indicate that acculturation and age are stronger predictors of hypertension than poverty in elderly Mexican Americans, with acculturation being a stronger predictor among those age 55-64.  Factors related to acculturation may have a stronger influence on the prevalence of hypertension in older Mexican Americans than differences related to socioeconomic status.
Ultrasound-Doppler diagnosis of Budd-Chiari syndrome.  We report a case of apparently idiopathic Budd-Chiari syndrome, diagnosed by ultrasound and Doppler sonography, in a patient with latent myeloproliferative disease.  This case proves that Doppler sonography shows in the hepatic veins a flow pattern suggestive of partial thrombotic obstruction.  Moreover, we suggest that the search for a latent myeloproliferative disorder, by means of the spontaneous erythroid colonies formation in culture of bone marrow or blood mononuclear cells, should be routinely included in the diagnostic evaluation of each case of hepatic vein thrombosis without other recognizable causes.
Substance P, acetylcholinesterase, and beta-endorphin levels in the plasma and pericardial fluid of patients with and without angina pectoris.  We measured substance P-like immunoreactivity (SPLI), beta-endorphin-like immunoreactivity (BELI), acetylcholinesterase activity, and total protein content in pericardial fluid and plasma of patients with angina pectoris and patients with no angina pectoris.  SPLI and BELI levels, acetylcholinesterase activity, and total protein content were determined by radioimmunoassay, a colorimetric method, and by the method of Lowry et al.  (J Biol Chem 1951; 193:265-75), respectively.  In the pericardial fluid, patients with angina had SPLI, BELI, acetylcholinesterase, and total protein values of 1.69 +/- 0.23 fmol/mg protein, 0.16 +/- 0.13 fmol/mg protein, 0.06 +/- 0.02 units, and 25.7 +/- 3.2 mg/ml, respectively.  Patients with no angina had SPLI, BELI, acetylcholinesterase, and total protein values of 0.93 +/- 0.17 fmol/mg protein, 0.19 +/- 0.10 fmol/mg protein, 0.16 +/- 0.02 units, and 44.6 +/- 5.3 mg/ml, respectively.  SPLI levels were significantly higher (p less than 0.03), and acetylcholinesterase (less than 0.002) and total protein content (less than 0.004) were significantly lower in the pericardial fluid of patients with angina when compared with those of patients with no angina.  BELI levels were not significantly different between the two groups.  In the plasma, no significant differences were found in SPLI, BELI, acetylcholinesterase, and total protein values between the two groups of patients.  Patients with angina had SPLI, BELI, acetylcholinesterase, and total protein values of 0.47 +/- 0.26 fmol/mg protein, 0.06 +/- 0.06 fmol/mg protein, 0.29 +/- 0.15 units, and 68.2 +/- 8.7 mg/ml, respectively.
Cardiac transplantation in female Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.  A young woman with humeroperoneal muscular dystrophy and contractures received a heart transplant for a severe dilated cardiomyopathy.  Cardiac histopathology consisted of myocyte hypertrophy, interstitial fibrosis, and nuclear hyperchromaticity without mitochondrial abnormalities.  Myopathy and heart disease were not clinically evident in her family, although three relatives had unexplained shortened Achilles tendons without weakness.  Tendon contractures may be a partial expression of this myopathic disorder, suggesting an autosomal dominant inheritance with variable penetrance.  A muscular dystrophy clinically similar to that of the Emery-Dreifuss (EDMD) type can thus occur in women.  Rather than the cardiac arrhythmias typical of EDMD, a dilated cardiomyopathy may occur and present with severe congestive heart failure.  This is the first report of cardiac transplantation in such a case.
Quantification of the reversibility of stress-induced thallium-201 myocardial perfusion defects: a multicenter trial using bull's-eye polar maps and standard normal limits   A multicenter trial was performed on 140 patients from four centers to determine the accuracy of quantitative analysis of stress/delayed thallium-201 myocardial tomograms using normal limits to assess the relative amount of reversibility of stress-induced defects.  The patients were found to have 85 fixed and 124 reversible defects, as determined by visual interpretation.  Reversibility bull's-eye polar maps were compared to gender-matched normal limits from 36 normals.  Regions were identified as reversible if their normalized difference between stress and 4 hr greater than 1.5 s.d.s.  from the mean normal limits.  Overall agreement between experts at multicenter sites and reversibility maps was 73% for reversible defects and 80% of fixed defects.  Sensitivity in detecting reversibility was highest for the left circumflex (88%) and lowest for the right coronary (60%).  These results indicate that reversibility polar maps and normal limits offer an objective, accurate technique for determining the reversibility of stress-induced perfusion defects.
Management of asymptomatic chronic aortic regurgitation with left ventricular dysfunction: a decision analysis   STUDY OBJECTIVE: To determine the optimal strategy for the timing of aortic valve replacement in patients with chronic, severe aortic regurgitation with left ventricular dysfunction.  DESIGN: Decision analysis comparing early surgery (timed at the onset of left ventricular dysfunction) with delayed surgery (timed at the onset of symptoms) using data from the literature and expert opinion for variables in a representative case scenario (40-year-old man with bicuspid aortic valve disease).  SETTING: Tertiary care center doing valve replacement surgery.  MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The early-surgery approach was preferred based on quality-adjusted life years.  Sensitivity analysis showed that the result was not affected by the following variables within their derived ranges: rate of symptom development after onset of left ventricular dysfunction for the delayed-surgery approach, perioperative mortality for both approaches, and occurrence of major nonfatal stroke or congestive heart failure for both approaches.  Although the decision was sensitive to the yearly postoperative mortality rates, the delayed-surgery operative mortality rate had to be almost as low as the early-surgery rate to change the preference to the delayed-surgery approach.  The preference could also change if survival were much more important to the patient in the first five years than after five years or if the patient disliked living on anticoagulants enough to value a year on anticoagulants as worth only 80% of a year not on anticoagulants.  CONCLUSION: This decision analysis provides quantitative support for the impression that patients similar to the case scenario do better with surgery timed at the onset of ventricular dysfunction than with surgery delayed until symptoms develop.  It thus supports the practice of following these patients noninvasively in order to time surgery.
The costs of prevention.  A prevention program is cost-effective if it yields more health benefits than do alternative uses of health care resources.  Some prevention programs meet this standard: either they actually save more health care resources than they utilize, or their net costs per healthy year of life gained are lower than those of alternatives such as curative or palliative medicine.  Other prevention programs, however, are less cost-effective than are medical treatments for the same disease.  One lesson for public policy is that generalizations about the cost-effectiveness of "prevention" are unwise.  Another lesson is that prevention programs should not be subjected to a higher standard than other health programs: they should not be expected to save money, but they should be expected to yield improved health at a reasonable price.
Embolization of a giant renal arterial aneurysm.  A 49-year-old man presented with right flank pain.  Angiography revealed a giant right renal arterial aneurysm.  Giant renal arterial aneurysms are typically treated by nephrectomy.  In this patient the aneurysm was embolized successfully with multiple Gianturco-Wallace coils and polyvinyl alcohol.  This case indicates that embolization may be a reasonable alternative to nephrectomy.
Renal autotransplantation in children: a successful treatment for renovascular hypertension.  Renovascular hypertension in children is not a common disease.  With improved surgical technique the incidence of nephrectomy has decreased and renovascular reconstruction is currently the preferred method to manage this entity.  Between 1977 and 1988, 21 patients with renovascular hypertension were treated at our hospital: 7 patients 6 to 16 years old underwent renal autotransplantation.  Of the children 4 had unilateral and 3 had bilateral disease requiring bilateral autotransplantation.  Autotransplantation was performed by anastomosis of each renal artery end-to-side to the common iliac artery.  The renal veins were anastomosed end-to-side to the common iliac veins.  The ureters were left intact in all but 1 patient who required a bench operation.  Of the 4 patients who had a unilateral procedure 3 are cured and 1 is improved with a normal blood pressure on a small dose of antihypertensive medication.  The 3 patients with bilateral autotransplants are cured.  These results, with normalization of the blood pressure in 86% of the patients and improvement in blood pressure in 14% with a patency rate of 87%, are similar to other reported reconstructive modalities in children.
Doppler color-flow images from a stenosed arterial model: interpretation of flow patterns.  The capability of the recently introduced Doppler color-flow mapping devices to accurately detect flow patterns in the region of an arterial stenosis was evaluated by use of an in vitro flow model.  Pulsatile flow simulating that in a low-resistance vessel was induced through a straight acrylic tube, which alternatively contained axisymmetric stenoses of 0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, and 80% diameter reduction.  Doppler color-flow mapper images were taken in realtime along the tube midplane from 0 to 8 diameters downstream of each stenosis.  Comparison of the Doppler color-flow mapping results with similarly recorded flow visualization (hydrogen bubble) images showed a close correspondence of key features of the flow, including detection of a high-velocity, centerline jet and near-wall separated flow zones.  Distinctive flow patterns exist with each stenotic case, and these should be of considerable value in diagnosing clinical disease conditions.
Everted cervical vein for carotid patch angioplasty.  Because of the theoretic benefits of autologous vein we undertook an investigation to evaluate cervical veins (facial, external jugular) as patch material after carotid endarterectomy.  A device that stimulated both circumferential fixation by sutures and radial tension exerted on in vivo patches was constructed to measure burst strength of tissue.  Mean bursting pressure for groin saphenous vein (n = 10) was 94.5 +/- 15.1 pounds per square inch (psi), 75.5 +/- 8.9 psi for ankle saphenous vein (n = 10), 83.3 +/- 14.5 psi for everted (double layer) cervical vein (n = 5) and 10 +/- 3.3 psi for single layer cervical vein (n = 5).  No significant differences between saphenous vein at any level and everted (double layer) cervical vein, but all were significantly different from single layer cervical vein (p less than 0.05).  From June 1987 through November 1989, 19 patients underwent 21 carotid endarterectomies complemented with adjunctive everted cervical vein patch angioplasty.  Indications for surgery were asymptomatic stenosis (53%), transient ischemic attack (29%), and cerebrovascular accident with recovery (18%).  All patients were studied after surgery with duplex scanning.  Asymptomatic recurrent stenosis was observed in one patient.  Transient hypoglossal nerve dysfunction occurred in one other patient.  One postoperative death occurred as a result of massive aspiration.  These results indicate that everted cervical vein is comparable to the saphenous vein in resistance to bursting and can yield similar results as patch material after carotid endarterectomy.  Accordingly, saphenous vein can be spared and lower extremity incisions avoided.
Intraoperative peripheral Nd:YAG laser-assisted thermal balloon angioplasty: short-term and intermediate-term follow-up.  Laser-assisted thermal balloon angioplasty was performed in 48 arteries (iliac, superficial femoral, and popliteal).  Indications for surgery were limb salvage (25%), rest pain (38%), and claudication (38%).  Patients were categorized into three groups: lesions less than 5 cm, greater than 5 to 10 cm, or greater than 10 cm in length.  Demographic characteristics, risk factors, and outcome measures were compared by use of Fisher's exact test and Student's t test.  The time for vascular patency failure was compared by use of a standard Kaplan-Meier survival analysis for the three groups.  Initial failure to recanalize was noted in 14% in lesions less than 5 cm, 40% in lesions greater than 5 to 10 cm, and 73% in lesions greater than 10 cm.  The overall success rate was 38%, with a mean follow up of 1 year.  The less than 5 cm lesion group had a significantly higher rate of overall success (59%, p = 0.005) than the other two groups combined.  The greater than 10 cm lesion group did significantly worse (9%) than the other two groups combined (p = 0.028).  Patients in the less than 5 cm group had significantly longer patency than the other two groups (p less than 0.01).  Iliac lesions had a higher overall success rate (73%) than superficial femoral and popliteal artery lesions (35%) (p = 0.038).  In conclusion, the widespread application of laser-assisted thermal balloon angioplasty cannot be justified without further long-term clinical and laboratory investigation.  Conversely, the potential of this technique should not be dismissed out of hand.  Proper patient selection, length and nature of the lesion to be treated, and the appropriate forms, doses, and method of delivery of laser energy, remain to be defined.
Adult open heart surgery in New York State. An analysis of risk factors and hospital mortality rates   This study analyzes data from New York State's new Cardiac Surgery Reporting System, which contains information about cardiac preoperative risk factors, postoperative complications, and hospital discharge.  The purposes of the study were to determine the set of significant clinical risk factors and to identify cardiac surgical centers most likely to have serious quality-of-care problems.  Significant risk factors for in-hospital death were age, gender, ejection fraction, previous myocardial infarction, number of open heart operations in previous admissions, diabetes requiring medication, dialysis dependence, disasters (acute structural defect, renal failure, cardiogenic shock, gunshot), unstable angina, intractable congestive heart failure, left main trunk narrowed more than 90%, and type of operation performed.  Four of the 28 hospitals had significantly higher mortality rates than expected, given the risk factors of their patients.  Subsequent site visits and medical record reviews confirmed that these facilities had high percentages of quality-of-care problems among cases resulting in mortality.
Glomerular hyperfiltration indicates early target organ damage in essential hypertension   In 111 patients with essential hypertension (World Health Organization stage I or II), we examined the relationship between renal hemodynamics and left ventricular hypertrophy.  Left ventricular structure was determined by two-dimensional guided M-mode echocardiography, renal blood flow by iodine I 131 aminohippuric acid clearance, and glomerular filtration rate by creatinine clearance.  The glomerular filtration rate correlated with left ventricular mass (r = .52) and left ventricular cross-sectional area (r = .21).  Conversely, at a similar age, body mass index, body surface area, and arterial pressure, hypertensive patients with left ventricular hypertrophy disclosed a higher glomerular filtration rate and filtration fraction than those without left ventricular hypertrophy, whereas renal blood flow and renal vascular resistance measurements were not significantly different.  Thus, at similar levels of arterial pressure and renal blood flow, glomerular hyperfiltration was linked to early cardiac structural changes in essential hypertension.  We conclude that, in a hypertensive patient with normal renal function, a high glomerular filtration rate may be an indicator for early target organ damage in essential hypertension.
Repair of transposition of the great arteries with intact ventricular septum and left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.  Repair of transposition of the great arteries in patients with intact ventricular septum and fixed left ventricular outflow tract obstruction has been restricted to atrial baffle procedures, with or without attempts to relieve or bypass the left ventricular outflow obstruction.  However, the suboptimal results of these procedures, coupled with excellent functional results with the arterial switch operation in patients without obstruction, has made anatomic correction the goal in repairing these anomalies.  We report a technique for the anatomic correction of transposition of the great arteries, intact ventricular septum, and fixed left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.  Its consideration in these difficult cases is advocated.
The effects of dopamine on myocardial functional recovery after reversible ischemic injury.  Dopamine frequently is used to improve cardiac performance after acute myocardial ischemia.  Inotropic agents, however, increase myocardial oxygen demand and could potentially delay recovery from ischemic injury.  To evaluate this problem, we studied eight chronically instrumented dogs in the conscious state and performed two 15-minute coronary occlusions 48 hours apart.  After one of the occlusions, either dopamine (15 micrograms/kg/min) or saline placebo was administered intravenously from 1.0 to 1.5 hours of reperfusion.  The alternative infusion was given during the second study.  Preload recruitable work area, the area beneath the stroke work versus end-diastolic length relationship, was used to assess intrinsic myocardial performance.  Ischemia decreased preload recruitable work area to 13% of control after both occlusions.  After reperfusion, a 30-minute dopamine infusion acutely increased myocardial function nearly threefold as compared with placebo.  Myocardial performance after dopamine administration, however, was significantly depressed compared with placebo throughout the remaining 24 hours of reperfusion (p less than 0.01).  These data indicate that dopamine may impair functional recovery after ischemic myocardial injury and suggest that inotropic interventions should be used in this setting only when absolutely indicated.
Studies of controlled reperfusion after ischemia. XVIII. Reperfusion conditions: attenuation of the regional ischemic effect by temporary total vented bypass before controlled reperfusion.  This study tests the hypothesis that total vented bypass can attenuate the regional ischemic effect during a defined time interval before controlled blood cardioplegic reperfusion.  Thirty-three dogs underwent 2 or 4 hours of occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary artery and then received a regional blood cardioplegic reperfusate on total vented bypass.  Cardiopulmonary bypass and reperfusion were started after 2 hours of ischemia in eight dogs, and after 4 hours of ischemia in 25 others.  Among the 25 dogs, seven had total vented bypass started after the first 2 hours of the 4 hours of regional ischemia.  Segmental shortening (ultrasonic crystals), tissue water content (wet/dry weight), and histochemical damage (triphenyltetrazolium chloride stain) were assessed 2 hours after reperfusion.  Dogs reperfused after 2 hours of ischemia recovered 73% +/- 8% of control systolic shortening and sustained only 11% triphenyltetrazolium chloride nonstaining.  Dogs undergoing 4 hours of regional ischemia, but with total vented bypass 2 hours before reperfusion had improved recovery of systolic shortening (49% versus 31%, p less than 0.05), limited epicardial edema (79.6% versus 81.1% water content, p less than 0.05), and reduced histochemical damage (24% versus 39% triphenyltetrazolium chloride nonstaining, p less than 0.05).  These findings imply that institution of total vented bypass during ischemia attenuates the infarct process, increases regional recovery of contractility, limits edema and restricts histochemical damage, and may be a useful adjunct to myocardial salvage when controlled reperfusion can be provided.
Simulated left ventricular aneurysm and aneurysm repair in swine.  Patch reconstruction of left ventricular aneurysm may be superior to linear closure, but this hypothesis has not been tested experimentally.  Accordingly, six anesthetized domestic pigs were instrumented to measure regional left ventricular wall thickening, stroke volume, systolic left ventricular pressure, and myocardial oxygen consumption.  With total bypass and cardioplegia, a 6 by 8 cm Dacron patch was inserted into the anteroapical left ventricle.  Simulations were as follows: left ventricular aneurysm, patch open; patch reconstruction, 50% patch plication; standard repair, ventriculotomy edges approximated.  Global function, from stroke work (stroke volume x integral of left ventricular pressure)-left ventricular end-diastolic pressure curves, was depressed in all three simulations compared with control.  A tendency for stroke work to be greater for standard repair than for left ventricular aneurysm and patch reconstruction at higher preloads was not statistically significant.  Mechanical efficiency, from stroke work/myocardial oxygen consumption (joules per milliliter oxygen per beat), was 2.43 +/- 0.52 (mean +/- standard error of the mean) (control), 2.22 +/- 0.94 (standard repair), 1.27 +/- 0.39 (patch reconstruction), and 1.09 +/- 0.37 (left ventricular aneurysm) (no significant differences).  Regional work was calculated as regional left ventricular wall thickening x integral of left ventricular pressure.  The slope of the regional work-end-diastolic wall thickness relation decreased in the posterior wall 14.0 +/- 2.9 (control) versus 8.4 +/- 2.0 (left ventricular aneurysm), 6.9 +/- 1.4 (patch reconstruction), and 7.4 +/- 1.4 (standard repair) (p less than 0.05).  In the anterior wall, contractility did not change significantly (7.4 +/- 1.2, control; 7.8 +/- 2.7, left ventricular aneurysm; 5.0 +/- 0.4, patch reconstruction; and 5.3 +/- 0.4, standard repair).  Decreased end-diastolic wall thinning anteriorly suggested tethering.  These results in the normal left ventricle suggest that patch ventriculoplasty is of no greater benefit than linear repair.  Either repair may impede function of adjacent myocardium through restriction of regional diastolic lengthening.
Intraoperative transesophageal color-coded Doppler echocardiography for evaluation of residual regurgitation after mitral valve repair.  Because mitral valve competence after mitral valve reconstruction is awkward to assess during this procedure, we evaluated in this respect transesophageal color-coded Doppler echocardiography in 23 patients undergoing mitral valve reconstruction for severe mitral regurgitation.  Transesophageal echocardiographic examinations were performed after induction of anesthesia but before sternotomy (baseline), after mitral valve repair before decannulation, and at sternal closure, all at similar mean aortic pressure and echocardiographic instrument settings.  The degree of mitral regurgitation by transesophageal color Doppler flow mapping was visually quantified on a 5-point scale (0 to 4), pending the left atrial extent of the regurgitant jet.  This was compared with the degree of mitral regurgitation by left ventricular cineangiography performed within several weeks after operation and also visually quantified on a 5-point scale (0 to 4), with use of the right anterior oblique projection.  There was good correlation between the two methods (r = 0.83; p less than 0.001).  We conclude that residual mitral regurgitation, as assessed by transesophageal color flow mapping in the operating room, highly correlates with the ultimate mitral regurgitation by cineangiography.  Therefore transesophageal echocardiography can be helpful for evaluation of mitral valve competence during mitral valve reconstruction, and hence, in case of repair failure, allow valve replacement in the same surgical session, thus avoiding reoperation.
The health belief model: predicting compliance and dropout in cardiac rehabilitation.  We investigated the health belief model and the health locus of control constructs as predictors of group membership (compliers or dropouts) with cardiac rehabilitation and whether they added predictive utility to routinely assessed patient demographics and health behaviors.  Questionnaires were completed on entry into the study by 120 patients with coronary artery disease, and by the end of the 6 month program there were 58 compliers and 62 dropouts.  Discriminant function analyses were carried out to determine prediction of group membership.  The health belief model predicted group membership 64.6% of the time, explaining 5.2% of the variance.  Demographics, health behaviors, and health belief model factors accounted for 21.1% of the variance between compliers and total dropouts with group membership correctly predicted 74.4% of the time; avoidable and unavoidable dropout was correctly predicted 84.2% of the time with 56.9% of the variance explained.  Health locus of control did not distinguish between compliers and dropouts.  The addition of the health belief model provided additional information about compliance with cardiac rehabilitation beyond that explained by demographic and health behavior variables alone, particularly when predicting avoidable/unavoidable dropout.
Regional myocardial metabolism of high-energy phosphates during isometric exercise in patients with coronary artery disease   BACKGROUND.  The maintenance of cellular levels of high-energy phosphates is required for myocardial function and preservation.  In animals, severe myocardial ischemia is characterized by the rapid loss of phosphocreatine and a decrease in the ratio of phosphocreatine to ATP.  METHODS.  To determine whether ischemic metabolic changes are detectable in humans, we recorded spatially localized phosphorus-31 nuclear-magnetic-resonance (31P NMR) spectra from the anterior myocardium before, during, and after isometric hand-grip exercise.  RESULTS.  The mean (+/- SD) ratio of phosphocreatine to ATP in the left ventricular wall when subjects were at rest was 1.72 +/- 0.15 in normal subjects (n = 11) and 1.59 +/- 0.31 in patients with nonischemic heart disease (n = 9), and the ratio did not change during hand-grip exercise in either group.  However, in patients with coronary heart disease and ischemia due to severe stenosis (greater than or equal to 70 percent) of the left anterior descending or left main coronary arteries (n = 16), the ratio decreased from 1.45 +/- 0.31 at rest to 0.91 +/- 0.24 during exercise (P less than 0.001) and recovered to 1.27 +/- 0.38 two minutes after exercise.  Only three patients with coronary heart disease had clinical symptoms of ischemia during exercise.  Repeat exercise testing in five patients after revascularization yielded values of 1.60 +/- 0.20 at rest and 1.62 +/- 0.18 during exercise (P not significant), as compared with 1.51 +/- 0.19 at rest and 1.02 +/- 0.26 during exercise before revascularization (P less than 0.02).  CONCLUSIONS.  The decrease in the ratio of phosphocreatine to ATP during hand-grip exercise in patients with myocardial ischemia reflects a transient imbalance between oxygen supply and demand in myocardium with compromised blood flow.  Exercise testing with 31P NMR is a useful method of assessing the effect of ischemia on myocardial metabolism of high-energy phosphates and of monitoring the response to treatment.
Long-term outcome after surgical repair of isolated atrial septal defect. Follow-up at 27 to 32 years   BACKGROUND.  Atrial septal defects have been surgically correctable for more than 30 years.  The long-term survival rates among patients treated in the early era of cardiac surgery are poorly documented, but such data are of critical importance to the future medical care, employability, and insurability of these patients.  METHODS.  To determine the natural history of surgically corrected atrial septal defects, we studied all 123 patients who underwent repair of an isolated defect (ostium secundum or sinus venosus) at the Mayo Clinic between 1956 and 1960, 27 to 32 years after the procedure.  The follow-up status of all patients was determined by written questionnaires and telephone interviews.  Hospital records and death certificates were obtained if interim hospitalization or death had occurred.  RESULTS.  The overall 30-year actuarial survival rate among survivors of the perioperative period was 74 percent, as compared with 85 percent among controls matched for age and sex.  The perioperative mortality was 3.3 percent (four deaths).  Actuarial 27-year survival rates among patients in the younger two quartiles according to age at operation (less than or equal to 11 years and 12 to 24 years) were no different from rates among controls--97 percent and 93 percent, respectively.  In the two older quartiles (25 to 41 years and greater than 41 years), 27-year survival rates were significantly less (P less than 0.001)--84 percent and 40 percent, respectively--than in controls (91 and 59 percent).  Independent predictors of long-term survival according to multivariate analysis were age at operation (P less than 0.0001) and systolic pressure in the main pulmonary artery before operation (P less than 0.0027).  When repair was performed in older patients, late cardiac failure, stroke, and atrial fibrillation were significantly more frequent.  CONCLUSIONS.  Among patients with surgically repaired atrial septal defects, those operated on before the age of 25 have an excellent prognosis, but older patients require careful, regular supervision.
The frequency-dependent behavior of cerebral autoregulation.  Cerebral autoregulation is a complex physiological process composed of both fast and slow components that may respond differently to different rates and patterns of blood pressure variation.  To assess the temporal nature of autoregulation, transcranial Doppler velocity recordings of the middle cerebral artery obtained over prolonged periods were compared with blood pressure recordings in 5 patients without cerebral disease and in 13 patients with intracranial pathological changes.  Correlations between the velocity and pressure wave forms at various frequencies of variation were measured with systems analysis techniques.  Patients with aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage had high correlations indicating pressure-dependent flow and impaired autoregulation.  Patients without cerebral disease had significantly lower correlations (P less than 0.01), indicating intact autoregulation.  Examples of increasing correlations and correlations at new frequencies emerging as the clinical condition worsened are given.  These preliminary examples suggest that the application of systems analysis techniques to velocity and pressure data allow measurement of the temporal nature of cerebral autoregulation.
Acute changes in the dynamics of the cerebrospinal fluid system during experimental subarachnoid hemorrhage.  Early changes in intracranial pressure (ICP), ICP volume index, and resistance to absorption of cerebrospinal fluid induced by experimental subarachnoid hemorrhage were studied in cats.  After SAH, the ICP was slightly elevated, and there was a decrease in the buffering capacity of the intracranial space and a sharp rise in outflow resistance.  During infusion of blood into the cisterna magna with a constant infusion rate, an extensive increase in ICP could be demonstrated in contrast to the infusion of saline, which caused only slight elevation of ICP.  Furthermore, during blood infusion, the ICP level did not reach a plateau phase of pressure, as was demonstrated during infusion of saline.  It is suggested that the marked increase in ICP during blood infusion into the subarachnoid space is caused by intracranial volume loading and the simultaneous increase in cerebrospinal fluid outflow resistance.  It is concluded that the reported relationship between increased cerebrospinal fluid outflow resistance and increased ICP supports the hypothesis of a strong increase in ICP during subarachnoid hemorrhage in human subjects.
Distribution of angiographic vasospasm after subarachnoid hemorrhage: implications for diagnosis by transcranial Doppler ultrasonography.  A study was undertaken to determine how frequently angiographic vasospasm occurs outside the normal access range of transcranial Doppler ultrasound in patients who have suffered a subarachnoid hemorrhage.  Vasospasm located in the basal vessels is readily identifiable using transcranial Doppler ultrasound whereas spasm affecting the more distal, vertically oriented arteries is outside the standard detection range.  It is therefore speculated that the sensitivity of the technique would be adversely affected by a high incidence of distal vasospasm.  A total of 136 angiograms performed on 68 patients after a subarachnoid hemorrhage from anterior circulation aneurysms were reviewed to determine the typical distribution of vasospasm.  Of the 40 cases that showed greater than or equal to 25% vessel narrowing, 50.0% had spasm restricted to the basal vessels, 42.5% had spasm involving both basal and distal segments, and 7.5% had spasm of the distal segments only.  None of the patients with distal vasospasm alone developed delayed ischemic deficits.  It is concluded that most patients with anterior circulation aneurysms who develop vasospasm will have involvement of the basal vessels, but a small number of patients may develop vasospasm only in distal vessels.
Pharmacological reversibility of experimental cerebral vasospasm.  Using a morphometric technique, the pharmacological reversibility of luminal narrowing after experimental subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) was investigated.  For vasodilation, a "cocktail" consisting of 10(-4) M papaverine, 2 x 10(-4) M sodium nitroprusside, and 10(-5) M adenosine was administered intra-arterially.  Forty-two rabbits were divided into six groups: control (normal animals); control plus cocktail (normal animals perfused with the cocktail before fixation); SAH (animals sacrificed 48 hours subsequent to intracisternal injection of 1.5 ml/kg of arterial blood); SAH plus cocktail (SAH plus perfusion with the cocktail); BaCl2 (animals sacrificed 10 minutes after intracisternal injection of 2 ml of 3 x 10(-3) M BaCl2); and BaCl2 plus cocktail (BaCl2 animals perfused with the cocktail).  The diameter of the basilar arteries in the control and the control plus cocktail groups was not significantly different.  BaCl2 reduced the diameter 44% and SAH reduced the diameter 27%.  There were no significant differences between the diameter of the BaCl2 plus cocktail group and SAH plus cocktail group when compared with the control or the control plus cocktail group.  Morphological examination by light and transmission electron microscopy showed luminal narrowing and corrugation of the elastic lamina with few degenerative or proliferative changes of the vessel wall in animals with SAH.  These results suggest that cerebral vasospasm is caused initially by smooth muscle contraction rather than by proliferative vasculopathy and that it is not an irreversible process.
Factors determining success and energy requirements for cardioversion of atrial fibrillation.  Factors thought to affect the success of and energy requirements for cardioversion of atrial fibrillation were studied in 80 (49 male, 31 female) patients aged 21-88 (mean 61.5 years).  Transthoracic impedance was measured in advance of the countershock using a 30 kHz low amplitude AC current passed through self-adhesive ECG/defibrillator pads (diameters 8-12 cm) applied to the chest in the antero-posterior (AP) position in 57 patients and the anteroapical (AA) position in 23 patients.  Mean transthoracic impedance for all patients was 69.3 +/- 16 (SD) ohms (range 39-131 ohms), but transthoracic impedance was significantly greater in the AA than the AP position (75.4 +/- 13 vs.  66.7 +/- 16 ohms, p = 0.02).  Initial energy was 50 J (delivered) and was gradually increased to a maximum of 360 J if required.  Cardioversion was successful in 73 of 80 (91.2 per cent), and low energy shocks (less than or equal to 200 J) were successful in 45 of 80 (56.2 per cent) patients.  Using single factor analysis, sex, left atrial enlargement, electrode pad positions, aetiology of atrial fibrillation, presence of left ventricular failure, and prior treatment with verapamil or beta-adrenergic blockers were not significant determinants of cardioversion success or success of low energy shocks but prior treatment with digoxin was, both for cardioversion success and success at low energies.  In patients with transthoracic impedance less than or equal to 70 ohms, low energy shocks were more often successful (33 or 50, 66 per cent) than in patients with transthoracic impedance greater than 70 ohms (12 of 30, 40 per cent), p = 0.04.  Using univariate analysis, cardioversion success with low energy shocks was not only significantly associated with prior treatment with digoxin but also with the duration of atrial fibrillation (24 hours to one month and one month to three years) and for shocks of less than or equal to 100 J, with prior treatment with amiodarone.  Multifactorial linear regression analysis selected, in rank order, only duration of atrial fibrillation of 24 hours to less than one month and one month to three years as significant predictors of both cardioversion success irrespective of shock strength, and success of low energy shocks.
Deleterious effects of testicular venous occlusion in young rats.  To determine the differences between testicular arterial and venous obstruction, the spermatic artery or vein, or both, were occluded for varying periods of time in young rats.  Two months later, at the conclusion of the study, the testes were examined.  Histologic degeneration after vascular obstruction was graded by a modified Johnsen's tubular biopsy score (TBS).  The testicular concentrations of enzymes (lactic dehydrogenase and sorbitol dehydrogenase), known to decrease with testicular injury, were measured.  TBS and seminiferous tubule diameter (STD) were found to decrease significantly after two hours of vascular occlusion and were similar regardless of whether the obstruction was produced by occlusion of arterial inflow or venous drainage, or both.  Testicular concentration of enzymes decreased significantly after permanent ligation of the spermatic artery and vein, but decreased minimally when the vascular obstruction lasted less than 120 minutes.  Testicular injury produced by venous occlusion was equally severe and occurred as rapidly as injury produced by arterial or combined arteriovenous occlusion.  No significant injury was noted in the contralateral testes in any group.
Sequential gradient pneumatic compression enhances venous ulcer healing: a randomized trial.  The treatment of venous ulcers has remained largely unchanged for centuries.  The application of properly applied graduated compression bandages, the use of graduated compression stockings, and surgery have been shown to achieve healing.  However, some ulcers persist despite appropriate management.  A randomized study was undertaken to compare two regimens of treatment for such patients.  Both regimens included ulcer debridement, cleaning, nonadherent dressing, and graduated compression stockings.  In one regimen, sequential gradient intermittent pneumatic compression was applied for 4 hours each day.  Only one of 24 patients in the control group had complete healing of all ulcers compared with 10 of 21 patients healed in the intermittent pneumatic compression group.  The median rate of ulcer healing in the control group was 2.1% area per week compared to 19.8% area per week in the intermittent pneumatic compression group.  The results indicate that sequential gradient intermittent pneumatic compression is beneficial in the treatment of venous ulcers.
Regression of intracardiac thrombus after embolic stroke.  Using two-dimensional echocardiography, we studied the pathophysiology of intracardiac thrombus regression accompanied by anticoagulant therapy in 82 consecutive patients with acute cardiogenic cerebral embolism.  We noted intracardiac thrombus in 15 patients; nine of the 15 were started on anticoagulant therapy with warfarin potassium to maintain the prothrombin time between 2.5 and 3.5 (international normalized ratio).  Serial two-dimensional echocardiograms were obtained for these nine patients before and after anticoagulation, with the plasma levels of fibrinopeptide A, fibrinopeptide B beta 15-42, and D-dimer measured at the same time.  In eight of the nine patients the intracardiac thrombi gradually decreased in size while the plasma level of fibrinopeptide A fell to within the normal range and the plasma levels of fibrinopeptide B beta 15-42 and D-dimer remained above the normal ranges.  In the other patient the thrombus disappeared, with embolization to the right arm immediately after starting anticoagulant therapy.  Mobile or small thrombi regressed earlier than nonmobile or large ones.  We conclude that regression of intracardiac thrombi after anticoagulation may be based on the relative predominance of plasma fibrinolytic activity over anticoagulation-inhibited thrombin activity.
Ultrasonic evaluation of early carotid atherosclerosis.  We investigated the prevalence of carotid atherosclerosis, including mild early lesions, and its association with cervical bruits and various risk factors (age, male sex, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, obesity, and cigarette smoking) in 232 consecutive Japanese patients.  High-resolution real-time B-mode ultrasonography was performed to determine the extent of atherosclerosis, and it was quantified by using a scoring system.  The prevalence of carotid atherosclerosis was 49%, 59%, and 41% in all 232 patients, the 100 symptomatic patients, and the 132 asymptomatic patients, respectively.  Although carotid lesions were detected frequently (87%) in the 30 patients with cervical bruits, bruits were noted in only 30% of the 88 examined patients with carotid atherosclerosis.  Independent risk factors for carotid atherosclerosis in these patients were found to be age, male sex, and hyperlipidemia; diabetes mellitus was a possible risk factor for carotid atherosclerosis.  Our study did not show a close association between hypertension and carotid atherosclerosis, and this might be caused by the high prevalence of hypertension in our patients.  Our findings suggest an increasing prevalence of carotid atherosclerosis in the Japanese, though this should be confirmed in a population-based study.  Our study demonstrates the clinical usefulness of high-resolution B-mode ultrasonography for the evaluation of early carotid atherosclerosis.
Effect of ischemia induced by middle cerebral artery occlusion on superoxide dismutase activity in rat brain.  Acute cerebral ischemia increases the generation of free radicals, causing cell damage, and theoretically may decrease the activity of the scavenging enzyme superoxide dismutase.  To investigate the role of superoxide dismutase in cerebral ischemia, we used a model of middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats.  In this model an infarct is produced in the pyriform and frontoparietal cortices, extending into the lateral basal ganglia.  We measured superoxide dismutase activity by using the xanthine oxidase cytochrome c reduction assay in these areas of rat brains.  Tissue samples were analyzed 20 minutes, 2, 6, or 24 hours, or 7 days after middle cerebral artery occlusion and 2 or 24 hours or 7 days after sham operation (n = 8-10 at each time).  There was no significant change in superoxide dismutase activity relative to control values in any brain area at any time up to 24 hours after surgery.  However, 7 days after middle cerebral artery occlusion a significant decline in superoxide dismutase activity, to 55%-68% (p less than 0.05) of that in unoperated controls, was observed in all brain areas.  Our results do not support an important role for changes in the activity of endogenous superoxide dismutase during the acute phase of cerebral ischemia.  However, the decrease in superoxide dismutase activity 7 days after ischemia could indicate ongoing additional damage to peri-infarct tissue.
Protein phosphorylation during ischemia.  Many investigations have shown that calcium and adenosine triphosphate are crucial to central nervous system functions.  It is probable that alterations of these substances during central nervous system ischemia are involved in the processes that cause irreversible neural damage.  Calcium regulates several protein kinases that are responsible for phosphorylation of proteins vital for many central nervous system functions.  Using a rabbit spinal cord ischemia model, we found protein kinase C and calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase were severely affected during the first hour of ischemia.  Protein kinase A was not significantly affected.  The time course of lost protein kinase C enzyme activity closely corresponded to irreversible loss of neurologic function, and there is evidence that protein kinase C inhibitor activity is generated.  Also, drugs that inhibit protein kinase C increased neurologic damage when administered during the early phases of ischemia.  These results suggest that protein phosphorylation, particularly by protein kinase C, is critical to maintenance of neurologic function.
Coarctation of the aorta.  Coarctation of the aorta is a common cardiovascular disorder with an unknown etiology.  In the preductal type, blood flows from a patent ductus into the distal aorta.  When the coarctation is juxtaductal or postductal, blood flows to the lower extremities by way of the subclavian arteries and collaterals.  Plain films may show the reverse sign in postductal coarctation.  Arteriography is the gold standard for making the diagnosis.  However, magnetic resonance imaging will probably become an increasingly important diagnostic tool.  The treatment of choice is surgery, with complete resection of the stenosed segment.
Venous ulcers: pathophysiology and medical therapy.  Venous ulcers may occur as a result of lower extremity calf pump failure, with ensuing edema, trapping of white blood cells and deposition of pericapillary fibrin.  Acute, smaller lesions are easily treated with adequate compression and occlusive dressings.  Larger, more chronic wounds often benefit from some form of external compression.  Occlusive dressings and local wound care are most effective when used simultaneously with compression.  Sequential compression pumps merit study and may prove to be of therapeutic and prophylactic value.  In refractory cases, long-term use of compression devices may be required to prevent ulcer recurrence.
Silent myocardial ischemia: dilemma or blessing?  Developing an optimal strategy for the evaluation and management of patients with silent myocardial ischemia is extremely difficult.  Although otherwise healthy, asymptomatic individuals may be at risk of dying suddenly during exercise, neither exercise testing nor Holter monitoring reliably identifies those at greatest risk.  In patients with underlying coronary artery disease, silent ischemia increases the risk of an adverse outcome.
Persistent uptake of indium-111-antimyosin monoclonal antibody in patients with myocardial infarction.  Indium-111(111In)-antimyosin scintigraphy was investigated in 27 patients with myocardial infarction.  111In-antimyosin Fab was administered intravenously, and planar and single photon emission computed tomographic images were obtained 48 hours later.  Uptake of 111In-antimyosin was present in 9 of 10 patients (90%) studied within 6 days of infarction.  During the second week positive scans were seen in 16 of 16 patients (100%) including 13 (81%) who had normal creatine kinase levels.  The mechanism of persistent positive antimyosin images in the subacute stage of myocardial infarction remains to be clarified.  111In-antimyosin scintigraphy may be useful as a noninvasive method for the detection of myocardial injury late and early after a suspected acute myocardial infarction.
Coronary perfusion catheter: its effectiveness in an experimental model of acute coronary occlusion.  The effectiveness of a coronary perfusion catheter was studied in an animal model of acute coronary occlusion.  Systemic hemodynamic variables, regional myocardial blood flow (RMBF) in the subepicardium and subendocardium, and regional systolic function (systolic segmental shortening) of the area perfused by the circumflex coronary artery (CX) were measured in eight anesthetized dogs.  After baseline measurements, the CX coronary artery was occluded with a silk snare and measurements were repeated after 5 minutes of ischemia (occlusion No.  1).  The snare was released and 1 hour later the snare occlusion was repeated after placement of a perfusion catheter in the CX coronary artery.  After 5 minutes, measurements were repeated (occlusion No.  2).  To determine the long-term effectiveness of the catheter, hemodynamic variables and regional function measurements were then obtained every 15 minutes for a total of 60 minutes.  During occlusion No.  1, RMBF decreased from 1.30 +/- 0.20 to 0.41 +/- 0.13 ml.min-1.gm-1 (p less than 0.01), and subendocardial RMBF decreased from 1.44 +/- .24 to 0.34 +/- 0.15 ml.min-1.gm-1 (p less than 0.01).  After insertion of the perfusion catheter (occlusion No.  2), subepicardial RMBF was maintained at 0.97 +/- 0.16 and subendocardial RMBF was maintained at 0.78 +/- 0.13 ml.min-1.gm-1; during occlusion No.  2 subepicardial RMBF was greater (p less than 0.05) than occlusion No.  1 and was not different from baseline.
Dose-dependent reduction of myocardial infarct size with the perfluorochemical Fluosol-DA.  The perfluorochemical Fluosol-DA has been shown to reduce infarct size.  However, the dose-response relationship of the agent is unknown.  Because perfluorochemicals (PFC) can potentially saturate the reticuloendothelial system and decrease carbon clearance as well as cause a transient elevation in liver enzymes, the present study was conducted to determine the lowest effective dose.  New Zealand White rabbits (n = 73) were randomly selected prior to infarction to receive 10, 15, 20, 25, or 30 ml/kg PFC or an equivalent volume of 5% dextran (control) intravenously.  Animals underwent 30 minutes of coronary artery occlusion with PFC or dextran infused over a 30-minute period starting at 20 minutes into the occlusion.  Animals were put to death at 24 hours and infarct size was determined histologically and quantitated by computerized planimetry.  Neutrophil infiltration into the ischemic myocardium was evaluated semiquantitatively.  No hemodynamic differences were noted within groups.  Infarct size was similar to that of controls in animals treated with 10 or 15 ml/kg PFC.  Significant infarct size reduction, however, was noted in animals treated with 20, 25, and 30 ml/kg PFC versus controls; (p = 0.05, 0.04, and 0.02, respectively).  Maximal infarct size reduction was seen with 30 ml/kg PFC (35%).  Neutrophil infiltration was significantly decreased in all groups treated with PFC.  These results show that intravenous Fluosol-DA significantly reduces infarct size at a minimal dose of 20 ml/kg.
Left ventricular asynchrony: an indicator of regional myocardial dysfunction.  There is a marked heterogeneity of myocardial wall thickening within the left ventricle and among different individuals.  It is therefore difficult to detect regional myocardial dysfunction from absolute values of systolic wall thickening.  We tested whether the extent of left ventricular asynchrony during ischemia and reperfusion can be used to quantify the severity of regional myocardial dysfunction when nonischemic baseline function is not known.  In six anesthetized, open-chest dogs regional myocardial wall thickness was measured by means of sonomicrometry under control conditions, at three degrees of ischemic dysfunction (mild, moderate, and severe), and after release of a 15-minute occlusion of the left circumflex coronary artery, when degrees of moderate and mild reperfusion dysfunction similar to the preceding ischemic dysfunction were present.  Two indexes of left ventricular asynchrony were calculated: (1) postejection thickening (PET) and (2) the phase difference of the first Fourier harmonic of posterior versus anterior myocardial wall motion (PD).  Systolic myocardial wall thickening was decreased from 15.3 +/- 3.1 (standard deviation) % (control value) to 9.7 +/- 1.4% (mild ischemia), 4.2 +/- 1.6% (moderate ischemia), and -3.7 +/- 3.1% (severe ischemia).  Conversely PET increased from 0.02 +/- 0.04 mm (control value) to 0.15 +/- 0.22 mm (mild ischemia), 0.19 +/- 0.15 mm (moderate ischemia), and 0.50 +/- 0.26 mm (severe ischemia).  PD increased from 9 +/- 28 degrees (control value) to 22 +/- 19 degrees (mild ischemia), 54 +/- 18 degrees (moderate ischemia), and 107 +/- 21 degrees (severe ischemia).  After release of the 15-minute left circumflex coronary artery occlusion, PET and PD recovered to 0.34 +/- 0.19 mm and 36 +/- 24 degrees (moderate dysfunction) and 0.25 +/- 0.31 mm and 29 +/- 8 degrees (mild dysfunction), respectively.  There were inverse linear relationships between systolic wall thickening and PET (r = -0.86, p less than 0.001) and between systolic wall thickening and PD (r = -0.87, p less than 0.001).  Inotropic stimulation by postextrasystolic potentiation increased regional systolic myocardial posterior and anterior wall thickening but did not alter the extent of left ventricular asynchrony.  Thus, when normal baseline function is not known, the severity of regional myocardial dysfunction at a given inotropic state can be determined by analysis of left ventricular asynchrony.  There was no significant correlation between the extent of PET and PD during ischemia and at early reperfusion and the recovery of contractile function at late reperfusion.  Thus PET does not provide a prospective marker for the functional outcome of reperfusion.
Detection and quantitation of ischemic left ventricular dysfunction using a new video intensity technique for regional wall motion evaluation.  Eighty patients with ischemic heart disease and 17 normal subjects were evaluated for left ventricular regional wall motion by means of a new method.  The wall motion analysis is based on video intensity.  This technique uses a temporally sliding analysis to evaluate the cardiac cycle in 100 msec intervals.  Presence of coronary artery disease was defined as more than 50% measured diameter stenosis.  Wall motion abnormalities in regions perfused by stenotic vessels were most common in early diastole (76%).  Sensitivity of this method at rest in patients with coronary artery disease was 79.7% (p less than 0.0001) and overall accuracy was 84.2% (p less than 0.0001).  Abnormalities in both systole and diastole were more common in regions perfused by severe lesions (greater than 75%) than in those perfused by moderately stenotic (less than 75%) vessels (p less than 0.05).  A comparison of the new method with phase and amplitude analysis was performed in 15 patients and with two-frame analysis in 40 patients.  This new method yielded a higher sensitivity than either of the other two methods.
Angiography, angioscopy, and ultrasound imaging before and after percutaneous balloon angioplasty.  We report two patients undergoing peripheral percutaneous transluminal angioplasty in whom angiography, angioscopy, and ultrasound imaging were performed before and after balloon angioplasty.  The first case with smooth atheroma diagnosed by angiography was found to have unrecognized partially occlusive thrombus by angioscopy.  After angioplasty, an intimal tear was identified by angioscopy and ultrasound but it was not seen by angiography.  The intravascular ultrasound image showed the tear to extend to the adventitia.  In the second case, an apparently smooth intimal surface as imaged by angiography was found by angioscopy and ultrasound to have extensive damage, including subintimal hemorrhage, intimal flaps, and arterial dissection at the angioplasty site.  These data suggest that the type of information derived from the three imaging techniques is quite different, and that each may have a specific role in intravascular diagnosis.
Clinical significance of simple heart rate-adjusted ST segment depression in supine leg exercise in the diagnosis of coronary artery disease.  To evaluate the clinical significance of simple heart rate-adjusted ST segment depression (delta ST/delta HR) in the diagnosis of coronary artery disease, 42 patients with stable exertional angina underwent supine leg exercise testing and cardiac catheterization.  During exercise, heart rate, a multilead electrocardiogram, and pulmonary artery wedge pressure were recorded.  The sensitivity and accuracy of the delta ST/delta HR criteria (greater than or equal to 3.0 microV/beat/min) were significantly greater than the conventional analysis of ST segment depression criteria (greater than or equal to 0.2 mV) for detecting three-vessel coronary artery disease at a matched specificity of 72% (100% versus 46%, 81% versus 64%, p less than 0.01).  A significant linear correlation was found between maximum pulmonary artery wedge pressure increments during exercise (delta PAWP) or Gensini score and the delta ST/delta HR (delta PAWP: r = 0.51, p less than 0.001; Gensini score: r = 0.47, p less than 0.001).  There were no statistically significant differences in the delta PAWP or Gensini score between patients with three-vessel disease who had delta ST/delta HR greater than or equal to 3.0 microV/beat/min and those with one- or two-vessel disease who had delta ST/delta HR greater than or equal to 3.0 microV/beat/min (delta PAWP: 18.1 +/- 2.0 versus 21.9 +/- 3.3, p = NS; Gensini score: 68.5 +/- 6.6 versus 66.3 +/- 11.3, p = NS).  These findings demonstrate that delta ST/delta HR is more useful than a conventional analysis of ST segment depression for identifying not only anatomically severe coronary artery disease but also functionally severe coronary artery disease.
ACE inhibition improves vagal reactivity in patients with heart failure.  The deranged autonomic control of heart rate was studied in 34 patients with heart failure (New York Heart Association [NYHA] functional class II to III) by examining the carotid sinus baroreflex.  The carotid sinus baroreceptors were stimulated by graded suction.  The slope of the regression line between increases in cycle length and the degree of neck suction was taken as an index of baroreflex sensitivity.  The reflex response is mediated by a selective increase of vagal efferent activity.  Baroreflex sensitivity therefore represents a measure of vagal reactivity.  Using multiple regression analysis, baroreflex sensitivity (BS) correlated positively to stroke volume index (SVI) and inversely to plasma renin activity (PRA) and to age: BS = 0.47 SVI - 0.38 PRA - 0.23 age + constant (r = 0.74; p less than 0.0005).  In addition to digitalis and diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (captopril or enalapril) were given to 16 patients for a mean of 17 +/- 3 days.  The patients with hemodynamic improvement (group A) exhibited improved baroreflex sensitivity (1.4 +/- 0.4 to 3.6 +/- 1.2 msec/mm Hg; p less than 0.01).  Baroreflex sensitivity remained unchanged (3.1 +/- 0.8 to 2.4 +/- 1.0 msec/mm Hg; n.s.) in the patients without hemodynamic improvement (group B).  The increase in reflex sensitivity did not correlate with hemodynamic alterations.  Baroreflex sensitivity during ACE inhibition (BSD) was only related to the baseline baroreflex sensitivity (BSB): BSD = 2.8 BSB - 0.46 (r = 0.84; p less than 0.005).  In patients with heart failure, reflex bradycardia decreases with age and with PRA and increases with stroke volume.  Chronic therapy with ACE inhibitors enhances vagal reactivity in patients with hemodynamic improvement.
Are ioxaglate and iopamidol equally safe and well tolerated in cardiac angiography? A randomized, double-blind clinical study.  A randomized, double-blind, parallel-group study was performed in 50 patients undergoing left ventriculography and coronary arteriography to evaluate ECG changes and the effects on left ventricular function of a low-osmolar ionic contrast agent, ioxaglate, as compared with a low-osmolar nonionic contrast medium, iopamidol.  Twenty-five patients received ioxaglate (group 1) and 25 patients received iopamidol (group 2).  All patients underwent 48 hours of continuous ECG recording beginning 24 hours before the cardiac catheterization.  Left ventricular systolic and end-diastolic pressure, peak positive dp/dt, and dp/dt/P ratio were measured immediately before and after left ventriculography and 3 minutes later.  Left ventricular systolic pressure did not change after injection of either contrast medium.  Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure increased by 30% in group 1 (p less than 0.01) and by 22% in group 2 (p less than 0.01) immediately after left ventriculography.  A further increase by 45% in group 1 (p less than 0.01) and by 24% in group 2 (p less than 0.01) was observed 3 minutes later.  No differences were observed between values obtained in the two groups.  Peak positive dp/dt did not change immediately after injection of either contrast medium but decreased by 5% (not significant) in group 1 and by 7% (p less than 0.02) in group 2 three minutes after left ventriculography.  There were no significant differences between the two groups.  Analysis of continuous 48-hour ECGs showed that both ioxaglate and iopamidol induced a slight increase (by 8% and 7%, respectively; p less than 0.05) in heart rate during injection with early and complete recovery.
Transesophageal echocardiography in the awake elderly patient: its role in the clinical decision-making process.  To assess the impact on the management and safety of transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) in the elderly population, the results and limitations of this technique were retrospectively analyzed in 88 patients.  TEE was indicated whenever the transthoracic approach was not diagnostic or was inconsistent with the clinical setting.  The most frequent clinical indications were to investigate the source of emboli, assess valvular regurgitation, and identify valvular vegetations.  In 72 patients (82%) TEE significantly influenced management decisions.  In selected patients TEE avoided the use of more invasive diagnostic procedures.  Adverse effects included occasional premature atrial or ventricular beats (11 patients), sinus bradycardia (six patients), and protracted nausea (one patient).  We conclude that in elderly patients with cardiovascular diseases, TEE plays a significant role in the decision-making process without adding a significant risk.
Noninvasive assessment of cardiac output in children using impedance cardiography.  This study evaluated the effect of intracardiac shunting on the accuracy of thoracic bioimpedance-derived cardiac output determinations.  Twenty-six patients, ranging in age from 3 months to 17 years, underwent cardiac catheterization during which simultaneous Fick and impedance measurements of cardiac output were obtained.  The subjects were divided into three groups: 10 children with no intracardiac shunts, nine children with predominant left-to-right intracardiac shunts, and seven children with predominant right-to-left intracardiac shunts.  Positive correlations between impedance and Fick-derived cardiac output determinations were obtained in the non-shunt group (r = 0.84), with lower correlations in the left-to-right shunt group (r = 0.70).  In the right-to-left shunt group, the impedance derived cardiac output correlated with Fick pulmonary flow (r = 0.82), but the variability was unacceptably large.  Although further study is needed, impedance cardiography appears to have validity as a methodology in pediatric critical care and cardiovascular health research.
A hematologist's view of contrast media, clotting in angiography syringes and thrombosis during coronary angiography.  While ionic contrast media (CM) are stronger anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents, both nonionic and ionic CM retard clotting, fibrinopeptide A generation and platelet aggregation (at least by Born-O'Brien aggregometry).  Thus, nonionic CM do not cause clots and thrombi.  Rather, the driving force for clot or thrombus formation, when it occurs, is blood contact with and activation by the foreign surface of a syringe or catheter itself.  A marked enhancement of clotting by glass syringes in comparison to plastic ones supports this view.  Blood in any syringe or catheter, therefore, will clot more slowly in the presence of nonionic or ionic CM, the inhibitory effects of the latter being more profound.  With respect to models of thrombosis at sites of vascular injury or stenosis, the antithrombotic effects of CM may either be transient owing to the dynamic nature of blood flow (local endothelial cell denudation model), or as in the case of ionic CM, actually to enhance local platelet aggregation (stenosis model).  In these situations, preservation of the antithrombotic functions of endothelium with nonionic CM may be quite critical.
Clinical cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging.  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a powerful tool providing high-resolution images of the heart and great vessels without the use of ionizing radiation or contrast agents.  MRI systems currently in use at many hospitals can be used effectively in the routine, clinical evaluation of many forms of cardiovascular disease, including great vessel disease, ischemic cardiac disease and congenital cardiac disease.  Moreover, quantitative and cine MRI techniques are now available, which provide highly accurate measures of chamber size, wall motion and wall thickening.  Recent developments in the areas of myocardial tagging, high-speed imaging and MR assessments of flow and perfusion suggest potential for an increasing role of MRI in the clinical evaluation of the cardiovascular system.
Clinical nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy: insight into metabolism.  Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy can nondestructively evaluate changes in metabolites with different disease states, as well as with therapeutic interventions.  Animal studies have provided the basis for understanding changes in high-energy phosphates with myocardial ischemia.  Studies of graded ischemia due to partial coronary stenosis have shown the sensitivity of the ratio of phosphocreatinine to inorganic phosphate to small reductions in myocardial blood flow and its relation to myocardial function.  The application of NMR spectroscopy to humans requires precise localization techniques to avoid acquiring contaminating information from structures around the heart, such as the chest wall and diaphragm.  With these localization techniques, metabolic evidence of ischemia has been demonstrated in patients with myocardial infarction and patients with known coronary disease, although the sensitivity of this technique for the diagnosis of inducible ischemia is unknown.  At rest, patients with dilated and hypertrophic cardiomyopathies often have an elevated phosphodiester resonance, possibly signifying abnormal breakdown of membrane phospholipids.  Increasing oxygen demand in these patients does not usually alter high-energy phosphates, suggesting that oxidative energy metabolism is preserved under these conditions.  NMR spectroscopy is a powerful tool to increase understanding of metabolic changes in a variety of pathologic conditions.
Positron emission tomography and interventional cardiology.  Current noninvasive diagnostic techniques have limited accuracy for detection of coronary artery disease (CAD) in symptomatic and (particularly) asymptomatic patients with silent disease.  Furthermore, no standard noninvasive method provides reliable diagnostic information on the location of the coronary arteries involved, the severity of stenosis, the presence of collaterals and myocardial viability.  Based on greater than 1,000 cardiac studies at the University of Texas, cardiac positron emission tomography (PET) with either generator-produced rubidium-82, cyclotron-produced N-13 ammonia, or F-18 deoxyglucose is suitable for 4 routine diagnostic purposes: (1) noninvasive diagnosis of CAD in either symptomatic or asymptomatic subjects with a sensitivity of 95 to 98% and specificity of 95 to 100%.  This accuracy is now sufficient to schedule diagnostic catheterization and multivessel angioplasty with surgical backup on the basis of the PET scan.  At the University of Texas we carry out PET in asymptomatic and symptomatic patients to direct those with mild disease to cholesterol-lowering reversal therapy and those with severe disease to percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA); (2) assessment of physiologic severity of coronary artery stenosis as compared to automated quantitative coronary arteriographic analysis.  Changes in stenosis severity are followed before and after interventions including PTCA, bypass surgery, vasodilator drugs and cholesterol control regimens for reversal of coronary atherosclerosis; (3) imaging myocardial infarction, ischemia, viability, zone at risk and sizing of these pathophysiologic processes.
Role of magnetic resonance contrast agents in cardiac imaging.  Improvements in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technology allow adequate spatial and temporal resolution to capture cardiac anatomy and contractile function in exceptional detail and with little risk.  However, tissue characterization of the pathophysiologic state of the myocardium may require special indicators or MR contrast agents.  These must be tailored for detection by the MRI process, but available agents are effective at low dose and provide a wide range of indicator properties (e.g., myocardial extracellular space, blood pool, capillary permeability and membrane transport).  Each agent has a dynamic washin and washout time-intensity curve that may reflect myocardial perfusion or consequences of ischemia.  The combined use of MRI and MR contrast agents may provide a single diagnostic examination that fully and quantitatively assesses all indexes of cardiac performance.  Such information would be both global and regional, and would be well tolerated by patients.  The cost, value and cost-effectiveness of such studies remain speculative.
Beta blockers and the primary prevention of nonfatal myocardial infarction in patients with high blood pressure.  A population-based, case-control study was conducted to determine whether beta blockers, used for the treatment of high blood pressure, prevent first events of coronary heart disease.  All study subjects were health-maintenance organization enrollees with pharmacologically treated hypertension.  Patients presented in 1982 to 1984 with new coronary heart disease, and control subjects were a probability sample of eligible hypertensive enrollees free of coronary heart disease.  With the investigators blind to case-control status, the subjects' medical records were reviewed for other coronary risk factors, and the health-maintenance organization's computerized pharmacy database was used to ascertain the use of beta blockers.  A larger proportion of controls than cases were using beta blockers.  This difference was confined to the subgroup with nonfatal myocardial infarctions.  For current use, the estimated relative risk for nonfatal myocardial infarction was 0.62 (95% confidence interval, 0.39 to 0.99).  Among current users of beta blockers, higher doses conferred greater protection.  Past use and total lifetime intake of beta blockers were only weakly associated with case-control status.  The current use of beta blockers may prevent first events of nonfatal myocardial infarction in patients with high blood pressure.
Timing and triggers of transient myocardial ischemia.  Use of exercise tolerance testing and new techniques of ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring to more objectively measure myocardial ischemia have enabled clinicians to better recognize the magnitude, timing and variable characteristics of transient ischemic events.  These commonly occurring events in patients with coronary artery disease have a diurnal pattern strikingly similar to that reported for catastrophic cardiovascular events such as myocardial infarction, sudden cardiac death and stroke.  Whether those factors that contribute to reversible ischemic events are similar to those causing infarction and sudden death has not been resolved.  However, the parallel increase in morning activity for these related phenomena suggests that a better understanding of the triggers of reversible myocardial ischemia may help improve understanding of the causes of myocardial infarction and sudden cardiac death.
Application of time series analysis to circadian rhythms: effect of beta-adrenergic blockade upon heart rate and transient myocardial ischemia.  Circadian variations of transient myocardial ischemia and heart rate have been identified, but the rhythms and their response to beta blockade have not been fully characterized.  Time-series analysis, a mathematical technique to describe oscillatory activity occurring within a continuous data set was used, to address these issues.  Nine men with coronary artery disease underwent 72 hours of ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring during therapy with placebo or metoprolol.  During administration of placebo, ischemic time and heart rate showed a primary peak with a periodicity of approximately 24 hours with a tight coupling between the 2 variables and a secondary peak with a periodicity of 5 to 8 hours.  During metoprolol therapy, heart rate and ischemic variation were reduced and the 24-hour periodicity for heart rate only remained.  The 24-hour periodicity for ischemia was eliminated, but the data with 5- to 8-hour periodicity became the major component of the signal.
Transient myocardial ischemia and its relation to determinants of myocardial oxygen demand.  Because of conflicting data and a clear need to establish the relative role of increase in myocardial oxygen demand versus reduction in coronary blood flow in the causation of transient ischemia, the role of heart rate and blood pressure changes immediately preceding and during the transient ischemic events observed during daily life were evaluated in 25 patients with coronary artery disease.  Elevations in heart rate before onset of ischemia were observed in 61% of the episodes.  Similarly, 73% of the ischemic events were preceded by an increase in arterial pressure.  These data provide evidence for a significant role of increased myocardial oxygen demand in the genesis of transient myocardial ischemia.
Mental stress as an acute trigger of ischemic left ventricular dysfunction and blood pressure elevation in coronary artery disease.  Acute mental stress may be a frequent trigger of transient myocardial ischemia, myocardial infarction and sudden cardiac death.  In an experimental setting, the effect of mental stress on hemodynamics and left ventricular wall motion abnormalities (as detected by radionuclide ventriculography) was measured in 29 patients with exercise-induced myocardial ischemia.  Seventy-five percent of the patients demonstrated mental stress-induced wall motion abnormalities.  Patients frequently exhibited greater increases in peak systolic arterial pressure during mental stress than during exercise.  Personally relevant mental stress is the most potent type of mental stress, both in terms of frequency and magnitude of ischemia.  Most mental stress-induced ischemic episodes are clinically and electrocardiographically silent and occur at heart rates significantly lower than those seen during exercise.  Both systolic and diastolic blood pressure increased during mental stress-induced ischemia, suggesting that increased myocardial oxygen demand plays a role in the pathophysiology of mental stress-induced transient ischemia.  The significant magnitude and acute onset of this mental stress-induced blood pressure elevation may in some manner contribute to atherosclerotic plaque rupture.  These findings may provide a pathophysiologic link to the epidemiologic association between mental stress and acute ischemic coronary events.  A new ambulatory radionuclide detector that can concurrently monitor left ventricular ejection fraction and electrocardiographic ST-segment change may enhance the detection and evaluation of transient myocardial ischemia in ambulatory coronary patients.
Potential usefulness of combined thromboxane A2 and serotonin receptor blockade for preventing the conversion from chronic to acute coronary artery disease syndromes.  Evidence suggests that unstable angina, non-Q-wave myocardial infarction and Q-wave myocardial infarcts represent a continuum, such that transient reduction in coronary blood flow associated with platelet aggregation and dynamic vasoconstriction at sites of coronary artery stenosis and endothelial injury lead to abrupt development of unstable angina.  Factors potentially responsible for the conversion from chronic to acute coronary artery disease include endothelial injury at sites of stenosis.  The endothelial injury may be the result of plaque fissuring or ulceration, hemodynamic factors (including systemic arterial hypertension or flow shear stress), infection, smoking, coronary arteriography or balloon angioplasty.  Clinical and experimental animal studies suggest that interference with thromboxane and serotonin contributions to platelet aggregation and dynamic coronary artery constriction may prevent chronic coronary artery disease syndromes from converting to acute disease.  To protect against this process may require both thromboxane and serotonin receptor antagonists or a combination of thromboxane synthesis inhibitor and receptor antagonist with a serotonin receptor antagonist.  Further studies are needed to test this hypothesis.
Beta-blocker duration of action and implications for therapy.  Two studies were conducted to measure the effect of serum half-life on beta-blocker-related heart rate reduction throughout the 24-hour period.  In the first study, nadolol, atenolol and pindolol were associated with significant (p less than 0.01) heart rate reduction even at 24 hours after dose.  Nadolol, with a plasma half-life of 15.5 hours, had the most pronounced heart rate-lowering effect 24 hours after the daily dose compared to pindolol, which had a half-life of 5.5 hours.  In a randomized, double-blind, crossover study, nadolol and atenolol had similar effects 3 to 4 hours after the daily dose.  Nadolol, however, produced greater suppression of heart rate and double product (blood pressure x heart rate) than atenolol (compared to placebo) 24 hours after ingestion of the daily dose.  On ambulatory electrocardiography 24 hours after medication administration, 80 to 100% of the heart rate-attenuating effect of nadolol was maintained versus only 20 to 45% of atenolol's effect.  Statistically significant (p less than 0.05) reductions in heart rate were produced by nadolol, but not by atenolol, between 4 and 5 A.M., 6 and 7 A.M., 8 and 9 A.M.  and 9 and 10 A.M.  Furthermore, nadolol remained at 52% of peak blood level at 24 hours, whereas atenolol was at 20%.  The data from these 2 studies indicate that significant differences in duration of action exist between beta blockers.
Effect of beta-adrenergic blocking agents on the circadian occurrence of ischemic cardiovascular events.  Clinical observations suggest that beta-adrenergic blocking agents can modify the circadian occurrence of a variety of ischemic events.  Morning awakening is associated with a rapid increase in blood pressure and pulse, serum catecholamine content and platelet activation, at a time of decreased blood thrombolytic activity.  Beta-adrenergic blocking agents have the potential to modify many of these events.  Current data indicate that these agents modify blood pressure and pulse, but do not prevent their early morning increase.  In addition, beta-adrenergic blocking agents decrease ventricular ectopy and its circadian variation.  Recent studies in humans indicate, however, that metoprolol does not affect the circadian increase in platelet activity or serum catecholamines.  The specific mechanism by which beta blockers affect the circadian occurrence of ischemic events remains uncertain.
Reduction of mortality, sudden death and non-fatal reinfarction with beta-adrenergic blockers in survivors of acute myocardial infarction: a new hypothesis regarding the cardioprotective action of beta-adrenergic blockade.  Beta-adrenergic blockers have been shown definitely to reduce the incidence of total mortality, cardiovascular mortality, sudden death and nonfatal reinfarction in survivors of an acute myocardial infarction.  The mechanisms to explain this protective action of beta blockers have never been elucidated conclusively, and include the antiarrhythmic and myocardial oxygen demand-reducing effects of the drugs.  An antithrombotic mechanism has also been suggested.  However, beta blockers have relatively weak antiplatelet activity, suggesting that their antithrombotic effects may be related to prevention of coronary artery plaque rupture and the subsequent propagation of an occlusive arterial thrombus rather than direct anticoagulant action.  The therapeutic ability of beta blockers to attenuate the hemodynamic consequences of catecholamine surges, may protect a vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque from fracture, thereby reducing risk of coronary thrombosis, myocardial infarction and death.
Exercise test predictors of ambulatory silent ischemia during daily life in stable angina pectoris.  The predictive value of several exercise test parameters in identifying stable angina patients at risk of silent myocardial ischemia during daily life were examined.  A total of 97 patients with coronary artery disease, stable angina and ambulatory electrocardiographic data were evaluated.  Of the 86 patients with a positive exercise test, 39 (group 1) had greater than or equal to 1 episodes of ST-segment depression and 47 (group 2) did not develop ST changes during ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring.  Comparison of the exercise test parameters between the 2 groups revealed early onset of ischemia during exercise tests as the single most significant (p less than 0.0005) predictor of ambulatory silent ischemia.  The other exercise test parameters showing significant differences between the 2 groups were the peak exercise heart rate (117 +/- 23 vs 126 +/- 20 beats/min, p less than 0.05) and peak systolic blood pressure (160 +/- 27 vs 176 +/- 27 mm Hg, p less than 0.01), both of which were significantly lower in the group 1 patients.  These data were used to derive simple mathematical formulas for calculating the risk of ambulatory silent ischemia.  These results demonstrate that stable angina patients at risk of silent ischemia during daily life can be accurately identified by evaluation of selected exercise test parameters.
Effects of theophylline, atenolol and their combination on myocardial ischemia in stable angina pectoris.  The effects of theophylline (400 mg twice a day), atenolol (50 mg twice a day) and their combination on myocardial ischemia were studied in 9 patients with stable angina pectoris in a randomized, single-blind, triple crossover trial.  Placebo was administered to the patients during the run-in and the run-off periods.  A treadmill exercise test and 24-hour ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring were obtained at the end of each treatment period.  Compared with placebo, theophylline significantly improved the time to onset of myocardial ischemia (1 mm of ST-segment depression) from 7.8 +/- 3.7 to 9.5 +/- 3.7 minutes (p less than 0.03) and the exercise duration from 9 +/- 3.4 to 10.1 +/- 3.5 minutes (p less than 0.04).  During atenolol and during combination treatment, the time to the onset of ischemia and the exercise duration were similar (10.8 +/- 4.2 and 11.2 +/- 3.2 minutes, 11.2 +/- 3.6 and 11.5 +/- 3.2 minutes, respectively) and longer than during theophylline administration (p less than 0.05).  Ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring showed that, during theophylline administration, the heart rate was higher than during placebo throughout the 24 hours (p less than 0.05).  During atenolol and during combination treatment the heart rate was similar and in both cases lower than during placebo (p less than 0.05).  Compared with placebo, theophylline decreased the total ischemic time from 97 +/- 110 to 70 +/- 103 minutes (p less than 0.05).
Effects of two types of fish oil supplements on serum lipids and plasma phospholipid fatty acids in coronary artery disease.  Fish oil has consistently been shown to lower triglyceride levels, but its effects on low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol remain controversial.  The current study compares the long-term effects of 2 different fish oil preparations (ethyl ester and triglyceride) versus olive oil in patients with coronary artery disease.  Eighty-nine subjects were randomly assigned to receive capsules containing 6 g/day (triglyceride group) or 7 g/day (ethyl ester group) of n-3 fatty acids, or capsules containing 12 g/day of olive oil for 6 months.  Mean triglyceride levels decreased by 28% in the ester and 32% in the triglyceride fish oil groups (p less than 0.05 for both).  LDL cholesterol levels increased by 3% (difference not significant) in the ester and 12% (p less than 0.05) in the triglyceride fish oil groups; in hypertriglyceridemic subjects the increase was 23% (p less than 0.01) and 14% (difference not significant), respectively.  Plasma phospholipid fatty acid analysis showed a fivefold increase in eicosapentaenoic acid levels in both fish oil groups (p less than 0.001), and a long-term decrease in arachidonic acid levels (p less than 0.001).  Achieved eicosapentaenoic acid level correlated with the degree of increase in LDL cholesterol (r = 0.38, p less than 0.05).  These data suggest that fish oil administration is associated with an increase in LDL cholesterol levels in a diverse group of patients with coronary artery disease; this change appears to be correlated with n-3 fatty acid absorption.  The impact of this increase in LDL is unknown, but should be considered as potentially adverse.
Predictive value of lipoprotein (a) and other serum lipoproteins in the angiographic diagnosis of coronary artery disease.  To determine the relation among lipids in predicting coronary artery disease (CAD), 213 patients undergoing diagnostic angiography for suspected CAD were prospectively studied.  Twenty-one patients had normal coronary arteries and 192 had CAD in 1 to 3 arteries at arteriography with measurements obtained with digital calipers.  Lipoproteins were measured and lipoprotein (a) [Lp(a)] was also assayed in a subset of 98 patients with CAD.  Statistical analysis was performed using uni- and multivariate techniques to test the association among age, gender, systemic hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cigarette smoking, family history, total cholesterol, triglycerides, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, very low density lipoprotein cholesterol, apolipoproteins (apo) A-I and apo B, ratio of apo A-I to apo B, and ratio of HDL cholesterol to total cholesterol, to Lp(a) and to CAD.  All factors except gender, systemic hypertension, diabetes mellitus and cigarette smoking were univariate predictors of CAD.  Multivariate predictors were, in decreasing order of significance, family history, age, HDL/total cholesterol ratio and apo B.  When Lp(a) was included, multivariate predictors were age, family history, apo B and Lp(a), in that order.  Lipid parameters alone showed that the HDL/total cholesterol ratio and that Lp(a) provide the best predictive tests for the detection of CAD in this referral population and may ultimately become important screening tests for CAD.
Videodensitometry versus digital calipers for quantitative coronary angiography.  Single-plane left coronary angiograms in 18 patients were prospectively analyzed using videodensitometry (XR-70 system) and handheld digital calipers to compare arterial dimensions, stenosis dimensions, intraobserver variability and interobserver variability for the methods.  A total of 648 arterial segments were measured, yielding a highly significant correlation between videodensitometry and caliper-determined cross-sectional area (r = 0.96, p = 0.0001).  Similarly, a highly significant linear relation was observed between videodensitometry and caliper-determined diameter (r = 0.95, p = 0.0001).  When data subsets for small, medium and large arterial segments were examined, higher variability in the correlation between videodensitometry and caliper-determined area was observed in the large segments (greater than 10 mm2).  In addition, caliper-estimated areas tended to be slightly smaller than videodensitometry-estimated areas in these segments.  For diameter estimations, correlations between caliper and videodensitometry data were similar for the entire range of arterial segment sizes.  Intra- and interobserver variability was low for both caliper and videodensitometry determination of diameter or area.  Thus, over a wide range of arterial dimensions, results obtained with caliper estimates of luminal area and diameter are comparable to those obtained with videodensitometry using the XR-70 system.
Frequency of myocardial indium-111 antimyosin uptake after uncomplicated coronary artery bypass grafting.  The reported incidence of myocardial damage after coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is highly related to the methods used.  Since indium-111 monoclonal antimyosin antibody scintigraphy has been shown to be highly specific and sensitive for myocardial necrosis, even in small lesions, uptake of this radiotracer was evaluated after CABG.  In 23 consecutive patients without previous myocardial infarction who underwent CABG for stable angina, 80 MBq indium-111 antimyosin was injected on the third postoperative day.  Planar images were obtained 48 hours later and analyzed for myocardial uptake of indium-111 antimyosin.  Scintigraphic results were related to creatine kinase MB levels, duration of both aortic cross-clamping and cardiopulmonary bypass, and electrocardiographic changes.  In all patients surgical procedure and postoperative course was uncomplicated.  Indium-111 antimyosin uptake was present in 19 of 23 patients (82%).  It was diffused in 7 patients and localized in 12.  No pathologic Q waves occurred postoperatively.  Fourteen patients exhibited ST-segment changes.  No good relation was found among indium-111 antimyosin uptake and creatine kinase MB levels, duration of cross-clamping or bypass, and ST-T changes.  It is concluded that some degree of myocardial damage, though silent, is common after CABG.
Prognostic value of predischarge low-level exercise thallium testing after thrombolytic treatment of acute myocardial infarction.  Low-level exercise thallium testing is useful in identifying the high-risk patient after acute myocardial infarction (AMI).  To determine whether this use also applies to patients after thrombolytic treatment of AMI, 64 patients who underwent early thrombolytic therapy for AMI and 107 patients without acute intervention were evaluated.  The ability of both the electrocardiogram and thallium tests to predict future events was compared in both groups.  After a mean follow-up of 374 days, there were 25 and 32% of cardiac events in the 2 groups, respectively, with versus without acute intervention.  These included death, another AMI, coronary artery bypass grafting or angioplasty with 75% of the events occurring in the 3 months after the first infarction.  The only significant predictors of outcome were left ventricular cavity dilatation in the intervention group and ST-segment depression and increased lung uptake in the nonintervention group.  The sensitivity of exercise thallium was 55% in the intervention group and 81% in the nonintervention group (p less than 0.05).  Therefore, in patients having thrombolytic therapy for AMI, nearly half the events after discharge are not predicted by predischarge low-level exercise thallium testing.  The relatively weak correlation of outcome with unmasking ischemia in the laboratory before discharge may be due to an unstable coronary lesion or rapid progression of disease after the test.  Tests considered useful for prognostication after AMI may not necessarily have a similar value if there has been an acute intervention, such as thrombolytic therapy.
Long-term effect of mexiletine on left ventricular function and relation to suppression of ventricular arrhythmia.  The effects of oral mexiletine on left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF) and ventricular arrhythmias--and a possible relation between these effects--were evaluated during 3 months of therapy in 29 patients with chronic ventricular premature complexes (VPCs) and a moderately reduced to normal LVEF by 24-hour Holter monitoring and by radionuclide ventriculography at rest and during maximum tolerable exercise testing.  After an average titration period of 13 days, a mean daily mexiletine dose of 739 mg was maintained throughout the treatment.  At the end of titration and after 3 months of treatment, patients with a baseline LVEF less than or equal to 40% (group 2) responded with a median reduction of the hourly VPC rate by 90 and 81%, respectively, compared with 79 and 72% in those with a baseline LVEF greater than 40% (group 1).  Couplets and runs of ventricular tachycardia were almost completely suppressed in nearly all patients.  A single patient had a proarrhythmic increase in VPCs during treatment.  Compared with baseline, there were no significant changes in resting or exercise LVEF after 1 or 3 months of treatment in either of the 2 groups of patients.  No correlation was found between treatment-induced changes in arrhythmia frequency and in resting EF.  No symptoms of congestive heart failure developed.  The study confirms that long-term use of mexiletine is efficacious and relatively free of cardiac depressant effects even in patients with diminished LV function.
Effectiveness of the once-daily calcium antagonist, lacidipine, in controlling 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure.  The efficacy of the new once-daily dihydropyridine calcium antagonist, lacidipine, in reducing ambulatory intraarterial blood pressure (BP) was examined in 12 untreated hypertensive patients.  The intraarterial recording was commenced 24 hours before the first 4-mg dose and was continued for a further 24 hours thereafter.  After dose titration and chronic therapy, a second 24-hour ambulatory BP recording was made.  There was a steady onset of drug action, maximal at 2 hours, but with reflex tachycardia after the first dose.  Chronic administration reduced BP throughout the 24-hour period, without tachycardia.  Mean daytime reduction in BP was 20 mm Hg systolic (p less than 0.005) and 12 mm Hg diastolic (p less than 0.02).  Mean nighttime reduction was 8-mm Hg systolic (p less than 0.05) and 6-mm Hg diastolic (difference not significant).  There was no postural decrease in BP on 60 degrees head-up tilting and hypotensive action was maintained during isometric exercise (reduction at peak of 32/18 mm Hg, p less than 0.05) and throughout dynamic exercise (reduction at peak of 23/14 mm Hg, p less than 0.05).  Lacidipine is an effective once-daily antihypertensive agent, with good control of stress response.
Atenolol therapy for exercise-induced hypertension after aortic coarctation repair.  After successful repair of coarctation of the aorta in childhood, exercise-induced upper body systolic hypertension is well documented.  Beta blockade has been shown to reduce the arm/leg gradient in untreated coarctation of the aorta; treatment before coarctation repair has decreased paradoxical hypertension after repair.  Ten patients with successful surgical repair of coarctation, defined as a resting arm/leg gradient of less than or equal to 18 mm Hg, were evaluated by treadmill exercise before and after beta blockade with atenolol.  Mean age was 5.5 years at repair and 18 at study.  At baseline evaluation, systolic blood pressures at termination of exercise ranged from 201 to 270 mm Hg (mean 229 mm Hg).  Arm/leg gradients at exercise termination ranged from 30 to 143 mm Hg (mean 84).  Follow-up treadmill exercise studies were performed after beta blockade.  Upper extremity systolic pressures at exercise termination were normalized in 9 of 10 patients.  Maximal systolic blood pressure recorded at exercise termination ranged from 163 to 223 mm Hg (mean 196 mm Hg, p less than or equal to 0.005).  Arm/leg gradient at termination of exercise also decreased significantly to a mean of 51 mm Hg (p less than 0.05).  No patient had symptoms on atenolol and exercise endurance times were unchanged.  The study results in this small series suggest that cardioselective beta blockade can be used to treat exercise-induced upper body hypertension effectively after surgical repair of coarctation.  Because a high incidence of premature cardiovascular disease has been well documented after satisfactory surgical repair, the findings are of importance for this group of postoperative patients.
Subnormal parasympathetic activity after cardiac transplantation.  Heart period variability (standard deviation of 120 consecutive RR or PP intervals) was used to assess baseline parasympathetic activity in 18 patients with congestive heart failure before and after orthotopic cardiac transplantation, and was compared to that of 16 age-matched control subjects.  Mean heart period variability (+/- standard error of the mean) was significantly greater (p less than 0.05) in control subjects (58 +/- 5 ms) than in the patients at any time before or after transplantation.  Heart period variability of innervated recipient atria did not change significantly early (1 to 4 weeks) after transplantation (16 +/- 2 to 24 +/- 5 ms; p = 0.11), but increased significantly between weeks 15 and 37 after transplantation (30 +/- 5 ms, p less than 0.002 versus before transplantation).  A stepwise regression model (R2 = 0.35; p = 0.01) showed that heart period variability was directly related to time after transplantation and inversely related to systolic arterial pressure after transplantation and degree of rejection.  Heart period variability of the denervated donor atria did not change from early to late periods after transplantation, suggesting that vagal reinnervation of the donor heart had not occurred.  These data indicate that baseline parasympathetic activity does not increase significantly during the first month after transplantation but increases significantly between months 3 and 6.
Erythrocyte fatty acids, plasma lipids, and cardiovascular disease in rural China.  Cardiovascular disease (CVD) mortality (coronary heart disease, hypertensive heart disease, and stroke), plasma lipids, and red blood cell fatty acid composition were examined in an ecologic study in 65 rural counties in the People's Republic of China.  Means of plasma total cholesterol, triglyceride, low-density-lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, and high-density-lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol concentrations were substantially lower and the ratio of HDL cholesterol to total cholesterol was higher in this Chinese population than in Western populations.  Mortality rates for CVD in China were well below Western values.  Within China neither plasma total cholesterol nor LDL cholesterol was associated with CVD.  A strong inverse correlation between red blood cell oleate concentrations and CVD was observed.  However, red blood cell oleate concentrations were not associated with plasma cholesterol but were strongly negatively associated with arachidonate concentrations, suggesting potential diminution of CVD by oleate through reduced platelet aggregability.  The results indicate that geographical differences in CVD mortality within China are caused primarily by factors other than dietary or plasma cholesterol.
Developing improved observational methods for evaluating therapeutic effectiveness.  Therapeutic efficacy is often studied with observational surveys of patients whose treatments were selected nonexperimentally.  The results of these surveys are distrusted because of the fear that biased results occur in the absence of experimental principles, particularly randomization.  The purpose of the current study was to develop and validate improved observational study designs by incorporating many of the design principles and patient assembly procedures of the randomized trial.  The specific topic investigated was the prophylactic effectiveness of beta-blocker therapy after an acute myocardial infarction.  To accomplish the research objective, three sets of data were compared.  First, we developed a restricted cohort based on the eligibility criteria of the randomized clinical trial; second, we assembled an expanded cohort using the same design principles except for not restricting patient eligibility; and third, we used the data from the Beta Blocker Heart Attack Trial (BHAT), whose results served as the gold standard for comparison.  In this research, the treatment difference in death rates for the restricted cohort and the BHAT trial was nearly identical.  In contrast, the expanded cohort had a larger treatment difference than was observed in the BHAT trial.  We also noted the important and largely neglected role that eligibility criteria may play in ensuring the validity of treatment comparisons and study outcomes.  The new methodologic strategies we developed may improve the quality of observational studies and may be useful in assessing the efficacy of the many medical/surgical therapies that cannot be tested with randomized clinical trials.
Effects of calcium channel blockade on calcium homeostasis in mild to moderate essential hypertension.  Calcium channel blockers may alter parathyroid hormone secretion in vitro, which would alter calcium homeostasis.  To determine the chronic effect of calcium channel blockade in vivo, we conducted a randomized, double blind, 16 week study comparing the effects of two pharmacologic antihypertensive agents, the calcium channel blocker diltiazem and the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor captopril on parameters of calcium homeostasis.  Both diltiazem and captopril lowered blood pressure to a similar degree.  Neither drug produced any significant change in blood levels of total and ionized calcium, magnesium, or phosphorus, which affect the regulation of parathyroid hormone and vitamin D.  In addition, at eight or 16 weeks following initiation, neither drug altered the serum levels of parathyroid hormone (PTH) or 1,25-(OH)2-vitamin D3 (1,25-D).  Chronic calcium channel blockade with diltiazem does not alter serum parameters of calcium homeostasis and, thus, should not affect bone mineralization.
Molecular biology in cardiology: recent developments and opportunities for clinical applications.  The revolution in molecular biology that has taken place in the last decade has provided powerful research methods that are changing our understanding of cardiovascular physiology and disease.  This editorial commentary will highlight several areas of current research activity within the broad and expanding field of molecular cardiology, with a special emphasis on prospects for clinical applications in cardiovascular medicine.
Clustering of atherogenic behaviors in coffee drinkers.  We studied the clustering of coffee consumption and selected atherogenic behaviors in older adults living in a southern California community.  Men were somewhat more likely to drink caffeinated coffee while women were more likely to drink decaffeinated coffee.  In men, but not women, caffeinated coffee drinking decreased with age and decaffeinated coffee drinking increased.  Caffeinated coffee drinkers drank more alcohol, consumed more dietary saturated fats and cholesterol, were more likely to be current smokers and less likely to be current exercisers than were non-coffee drinkers.  Smoking and exercise also showed a dose-response relationship to the amount of caffeinated coffee consumed.  Risk factor levels among drinkers of decaffeinated coffee were more like those of caffeinated coffee than non-drinkers.  These data illustrate the clustering of atherogenic behaviors with coffee drinking and highlight their potential importance in interpreting the growing body of literature about coffee and health.
The association between Type A behavior and change in coronary risk factors among young adults.  The association of Type A/B behavior pattern and changes in blood pressure, total serum cholesterol, serum triglyceride, body mass, and smoking was estimated in a cohort of 375 young Black and White men and women from a rural county in Central Kentucky between 1978-79 and 1985-88.  Type A participants experienced significant increases in systolic (2.90 +/- 1.29 mmHg) and diastolic (3.80 +/- 1.17 mmHg) blood pressure and in cigarette smoking (3.26 +/- 0.89 cigarettes per day) over the eight-year follow-up period, but Type B participants experienced no change.  Type A and B individuals showed similar changes in total serum cholesterol, serum triglyceride, or body mass.  Differences between behavioral types in blood pressure were present for women but not men, and for Blacks but not for Whites.  These findings suggest a possible significance of the Type A pattern for the development of cardiovascular risk of young adults.
The Framingham Disability Study: relationship of various coronary heart disease manifestations to disability in older persons living in the community.  The relation between coronary heart disease and disability was examined in 2,576 community-dwelling women and men ages 55-88 years.  These Framingham Study participants were originally recruited in 1948-51 for an examination of cardiovascular disease.  Twenty-seven years later, remaining members of the cohort were interviewed to ascertain physical abilities, and a score on a disability scale was assigned.  Multivariate logistic analyses examined disability in relation to uncomplicated angina pectoris (AP), complicated AP, and coronary heart disease other than AP, controlling for possible confounders.  In younger and older women and men, uncomplicated and complicated AP were associated with disability.  Coronary heart disease other than AP was associated with disability only in the younger men.  Congestive heart failure predicted disability only in the women.  These results suggest that onset of AP should be recognized as a critical point in the development of disability and that AP is a better predictor of disability than is myocardial infarction or coronary insufficiency.
Hypertension prevalence and the status of awareness, treatment, and control in the Hispanic Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (HHANES), 1982-84   The prevalence rates of hypertension among adult (ages 18-74) Mexican Americans, Cuban Americans, and Puerto Ricans were estimated using data from the 1982-84 Hispanic Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (HHANES).  Hypertension is defined as diastolic greater than or equal to 90 mm Hg, or systolic greater than or equal to 140 mm Hg, or currently taking antihypertensive medication.  Among Mexican Americans in the Southwestern United States, 16.8 percent of the males and 14.1 percent of the females were found to be hypertensive.  Among Cuban Americans in Dade County, Florida 22.8 percent of the males and 15.5 percent of the females were hypertensive.  Among Puerto Ricans in the New York City area 15.6 percent of the males and 11.5 percent of the females were hypertensive.  The age-adjusted rates are significantly lower than comparable rates for Whites and Blacks as measured in the second National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES II), 1976-80.  Control of hypertension in the HHANES populations fall short of the 1990 Objectives for the Nation established by the US Public Health Service 60 percent (34 percent controlled Mexican American hypertensives, 27.8 percent controlled Cuban American hypertensives, and 29 percent controlled Puerto Rican hypertensives.
A note on the measurement of hypertension in HHANES   Using data from the HHANES, we found the rates of elevated blood pressure readings on clinical examination to be extremely low for a sample of Mexican American and Puerto Rican women.  The prevalence rates were one-fourth to one-fifth the rates found for a comparable sample of White women from NHANESII.  These findings are discrepant with the little that is known about hypertension prevalence among Hispanics and with estimates of hypertension prevalence for Mexican Americans and Puerto Ricans drawn from NHANESII.  While our HHANES samples women had much lower rates of clinical high blood pressure than Whites, they reported hypertension histories in excess of Whites.  Rates of medicine usage among Hispanics were insufficiently large for effective treatment to explain the disparity.  The prevalence estimates increased, but the relative discrepancies remained when we altered our sample specifications and clinical high blood pressure measure.  A possible explanation for these discrepancies is that few physicians performed the majority of blood pressure readings in our HHANES sample.  This may have been statistically inefficient.  The discrepancies noted suggest that HHANES may not be a reliable source of information on hypertension among Hispanic women.
Long-term impact of smoking cessation on the incidence of coronary heart disease.  Using a simulation model of the US male population, we estimated the long-term impact that future smoking cessation programs would have on the distribution and occurrence of coronary heart disease in males ages 35-84.  For interventions that reduce the number of smokers by 25 percent in 1990, the number of men free of coronary heart disease is projected to increase by 416,787 (0.7 percent) in 2015, and the age-standardized absolute incidence to decline by 2.3 percent.  Incidence rates and absolute incidences are projected to fall in men under age 65, but absolute incidence would rise in men over age 65, in large part because of the increased number of men who were at risk for coronary heart disease because of a reduction in non-coronary smoking-related mortality.  These trends were more marked for greater smoking reductions and were generally unaffected in a variety of analyses using alternative assumptions, which considered smoking as a risk factor in the elderly, a lag-time before benefits from smoking cessation were realized and secular declines in smoking prevalence.  Subject to the assumptions of our model, we conclude that smoking reductions will markedly reduce coronary heart disease, especially in younger age groups, and that this benefit will be slightly offset by a small increase in absolute incidence in elderly men.
Fish oil supplementation in patients with stable claudication.  Increased blood viscosity occurs in patients with claudication.  This increase in viscosity, which is mainly due to elevated fibrinogen levels and a decreased red cell deformability, adversely influences blood flow.  In addition to a positive effect on blood pressure, blood lipids, and platelet responsiveness, fish oil may improve blood flow due to a favorable influence on hemorrheology.  In a prospective, randomized, double-blind study, we evaluated the effect of six capsules of fish oil (1.8 g eicosapentaenoic acid and 1.2 g docosahexaenoic acid) versus six capsules of corn oil (3 g linoleic acid), administered for 4 months, on walking distances, pressure indices during rest and after exercise, blood pressure, red cell deformability, fibrinogen, and lipid levels in 32 patients with stable claudication.  No significant changes in walking distances and pressure indices during rest and after exercise occurred, despite a significant increase in red cell deformability in the fish oil group.  Fibrinogen levels did not change in either group.  In the fish oil group, a favorable change in blood lipids was noted; high-density cholesterol increased and triglycerides decreased.  Mean arterial blood pressure declined to a similar extent in both groups.  Thus, short-term supplementation with fish oil does not lead to clinically significant improvement of symptoms in patients with stable claudication.  This suggests that red cell deformability is of minor importance in the arterial blood flow in the legs of these patients.
Comparison of blood flow assessment between laser Doppler velocimetry and the hydrogen gas clearance method in ischemic intestine in dogs.  Blood flow of the colon and the ileum was measured before and after intestinal devascularization by laser Doppler velocimetry and the hydrogen gas clearance technique in 10 dogs in order to evaluate the clinical usefulness of laser Doppler velocimetry.  The submucosal blood flow of the colon and the ileum measured by the hydrogen gas clearance method was significantly decreased, as was the subserosal blood flow of both sites measured by laser Doppler velocimetry.  There was a linear relationship between the flow values using the two methods both in the colon (r = 0.7192, p less than 0.001) and in the ileum (r = 0.7646, p less than 0.001).  These data suggested laser Doppler velocimetry may be a useful method to assess the degree of intestinal ischemia because of its noninvasiveness and good correlation with submucosal blood flow by the hydrogen gas clearance technique.
No finding of increased myocardial ischemia during or after carotid endarterectomy under anesthesia with nitrous oxide.  Nitrous oxide (N2O) has been implicated as a cause of myocardial ischemia.  We investigated whether substitution of N2O for a portion of the anesthesia supplied by isoflurane increased myocardial ischemia in patients at risk for such ischemia.  Seventy patients having carotid endarterectomies (63 patients) or other carotid surgery (seven patients) were prospectively, randomly assigned to an anesthetic regimen that included or excluded N2O.  All other aspects of anesthetic management were similar, except for greater concentrations of oxygen and isoflurane in patients not given N2O.  Perioperative monitoring for myocardial ischemia and infarction included 12- or 5-lead electrocardiography, transesophageal echocardiography, and creatine kinase isoenzyme levels.  By transesophageal echocardiographic or electrocardiographic criteria, 44% of patients given oxygen but only 21% of those given N2O had myocardial ischemia intraoperatively (P = 0.065).  Similarly, myocardial infarction, identified by changes in creatine kinase isoenzymes, occurred in only one patient given N2O but in three given oxygen (not significantly different).  Thus we found no trend indicating a greater incidence of myocardial ischemia or infarction associated with the use of N2O.
Thoracic epidural anesthesia improves global and regional left ventricular function during stress-induced myocardial ischemia in patients with coronary artery disease.  The aim of the present investigation was to study the effects of high thoracic epidural anesthesia (TEA), including the cardiac sympathetic segments, on ischemic ST-segment changes and left ventricular global and regional wall motion abnormalities.  Ten patients with a two- or three-vessel coronary artery disease, all treated with the beta-adrenergic blocker metoprolol because of severe stable angina pectoris, performed two identical exercise stress tests, the first without TEA (control exercise) and the second with TEA (TEA exercise).  Before each stress test, intravenous metoprolol was given to achieve maximal or near maximal beta-adrenoceptor blockade.  Systolic and diastolic arterial pressures (radial artery cannula), heart rate, and rate-pressure product, as well as global and regional ejection fractions, using equilibrium radionuclide angiography in the left anterior oblique projection, were measured at rest and during maximal exercise.  ST-segment analysis (V3 or V5) was performed, and the regional wall motion score was calculated at control exercise and TEA exercise.  Intravenous metoprolol or intravenous metoprolol plus TEA at rest did not cause any significant changes of any of the variables.  During TEA exercise, systolic arterial pressure, diastolic arterial pressure, and rate-pressure product, but not heart rate, were significantly lower compared to control exercise.  The global and anterolateral ejection fractions were significantly higher (52.8% versus 46.5% and 53.2% versus 46.0%, respectively, P less than 0.05), and the regional wall motion score was significantly lower (8.8 versus 11.8, P less than 0.01) during TEA exercise than during control exercise.  ST-segment depression was significantly lower during TEA exercise (-1.03 versus -1.84 mV, P less than 0.01).
Pulmonary hypertension after heparin-protamine: roles of left-sided infusion, histamine, and platelet-activating factor.  Severe pulmonary hypertension after protamine neutralization of heparin is an infrequent but life-threatening event following cardiopulmonary bypass.  The effect of left ventricular infusion of protamine on pulmonary hypertension as well as a possible role of platelet-activating factor (PAF) or histamine in the heparin-protamine reaction was investigated in 30 pigs in four different groups during general anesthesia.  Group 1 animals received 250 IU/kg heparin, followed by 100 mg protamine intravenously after 15 min.  In group 2 protamine was infused into the left ventricle.  Group 3 animals received the histamine H1- and H2-antagonists clemastine and ranitidine 5 min before protamine infusion.  In group 4 the PAF receptor blocker WEB 2086 was given 5 min before protamine.  Platelet-activating factor was measured by a bioassay in serum samples of group 1 and group 4 animals.  In all four groups protamine caused severe pulmonary hypertension, thromboxane A2 release, and a transient decrease in leukocyte counts.  No PAF release was detected after protamine infusion.  Neither left ventricular infusion of protamine nor histamine or PAF antagonists prevented or attenuated the reactions after protamine infusion.  The authors conclude that left ventricular infusion of protamine provides no protection from pulmonary hypertension, and that histamine and PAF are not involved in the acute pulmonary vasoconstriction after protamine neutralization of heparin.
Effects of thoracic epidural anesthesia on coronary arteries and arterioles in patients with coronary artery disease.  The effect of cardiac sympathetic blockade by high thoracic epidural anesthesia (TEA) (T1-T6, bupivacaine) on the luminal diameter of normal and diseased portions of epicardial coronary arteries was determined by quantitative coronary angiography in patients (n = 27) with severe coronary artery disease (CAD).  In a separate group of patients (n = 9) with severe CAD, the effects of TEA on coronary arterioles (resistance vessels) were studied, by measuring total and regional myocardial blood flow and metabolism with the retrograde coronary sinus thermodilution technique.  At the stenotic segments, TEA induced an increase in luminal diameter from 1.34 +/- 0.11 to 1.56 +/- 0.13 mm (P less than 0.002), but did not change the diameter of the nonstenotic segments (3.07 +/- 0.13 to 2.99 +/- 0.13 mm).  In the second group of patients, TEA induced no changes in coronary perfusion pressure, total or regional myocardial blood flow, coronary venous oxygen content, coronary blood flow distribution, regional myocardial oxygen consumption, or lactate extraction or uptake.  Two patients had chest pain in the control situation and had regional myocardial lactate production that was attenuated by TEA.  We conclude that TEA may increase the diameter of stenotic epicardial coronary artery segments in patients with CAD without causing a dilation of coronary arterioles.  These effects may be beneficial when high TEA is used to treat severe ischemic chest pain in patients at rest.
Effects of ketamine on the cardiac papillary muscle of normal hamsters and those with cardiomyopathy.  The effect of ketamine (10(-5) and 10(-4) M) on the intrinsic contractility of left ventricular papillary muscle from normal hamsters and those with cardiomyopathy (BIO 82.62, 6-month old) was investigated.  At these concentrations, ketamine induced a positive inotropic effect on normal papillary muscle, as shown by an increase in maximum unloaded shortening velocity (+19 +/- 4 and +34 +/- 5%, P less than 0.05), active isometric force (+32 +/- 8 and +57 +/- 11%, P less than 0.05), and peak power output (+40 +/- 8 and +80 +/- 16%, P less than 0.05), and induced a slight decrease in sarcoplasmic reticulum function.  Ketamine had no effect on the curvature of the total force-velocity curve, suggesting that it does not modify myothermal economy.  Contractility of papillary muscle from hamsters with cardiomyopathy was less than that of controls, as shown by the decrease in isometric active force (-41%, P less than 0.02), peak power output (-33%, P less than 0.05), and sarcoplasmic reticulum function.  The positive inotropic effect of ketamine on papillary muscle from hamsters with cardiomyopathy was less marked than in controls and almost suppressed in some cases: only the maximum unloaded shortening velocity was significantly increased with 10(-5) M ketamine (+7 +/- 6%, P less than 0.05), whereas no significant changes were observed in active isometric force (+14 +/- 8 and +13 +/- 11%; nonsignificant [NS]) and peak power output (+9 +/- 5 and +13 +/- 8%; NS) with ketamine (10(-5) and 10(-4) M, respectively).
Prehospital cardiac arrest: the impact of witnessed collapse and bystander CPR in a metropolitan EMS system with short response times.  OBJECTIVE: Numerous studies have shown initiation of bystander CPR to significantly improve survival from prehospital cardiac arrest.  However, in emergency medical services (EMS) systems with very short response times, bystander CPR has not been shown to impact outcome.  The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of bystander CPR on survival from out-of-hospital cardiac arrest in such a system.  DESIGN: Prehospital, hospital, and death certificate data from a medium-sized metropolitan area were retrospectively analyzed for adult, nontraumatic cardiac arrest during a 16-month period.  RESULTS: A total of 298 patients met study criteria.  One hundred ninety-five arrests (65.4%) were witnessed, and 103 (34.6%) were unwitnessed.  Twenty-five witnessed victims (12.8%) were discharged alive, whereas no unwitnessed victims survived (P less than .001).  Patients suffering a witnessed episode of ventricular fibrillation/tachycardia (VF/VT) were more likely to survive (21.9%) than were other patients (2.0%, P less than .0001).  Among witnessed patients, initiation of bystander CPR was associated with a significant improvement in survival (20.0%) compared with the no-bystander CPR group (9.2%, P less than .05).  Bystander CPR was also associated with improved outcome when witnessed patients with successful prehospital resuscitation were evaluated as a group; 18 had bystander CPR, of whom 13 (72.2%) survived compared with only 12 of 38 patients with no bystander CPR (31.6%, P less than .01).  CONCLUSION: Our data revealed improved survival rates when bystander CPR was initiated on victims of witnessed cardiac arrest in an EMS system with short response times.
Transtelephonic defibrillation.  STUDY OBJECTIVES: This study was undertaken to assess the safety and reliability of a device for transtelephonic defibrillation.  DESIGN: The transtelephonic system consists of a patient unit and a base station.  The patient unit contains a monitor-defibrillator, electrode pads, microphone, microprocessor, and DC defibrillator.  The base station comprises a control panel, computer, and ECG display.  SETTING: Fifteen patients who were treated in our emergency department for cardiac arrest were placed on patient units that activated our base station in a remote location within the ED.  TYPE OF PARTICIPANTS: Thirteen patients were treated for ventricular fibrillation, and two patients were treated for ventricular tachycardia.  INTERVENTIONS: Thirty-one shocks were delivered transtelephonically.  MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: In all cases, voice and ECG transmission were established without difficulty.  CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that this system represents a safe and reliable method for the treatment of ventricular fibrillation, and we advocate additional use to study the prehospital applications of transtelephonic defibrillation.
Dissecting aneurysm of the pulmonary artery with pulmonary hypertension.  Pulmonary artery dissection was observed in a 64-yr-old female patient with severe pulmonary hypertension, which was probably primary (pulmonary vascular resistance, 817 dyn.s.cm-5; normal range less than or equal to 200 dyn.s.cm-5).  The patient was admitted to the hospital because of severe dyspnea on exertion.  Echocardiography demonstrated a dissecting aneurysm of the pulmonary artery.  Right heart catheterization revealed severe pulmonary hypertension (mean pulmonary artery pressure, 64 mm Hg; normal range, 10 to 22 mm Hg); dissection of the pulmonary artery was confirmed by pulmonary arteriography.  One-year follow-up was uneventful.  In the literature, 28 patients with dissecting aneurysm of the pulmonary artery are reviewed.  The dissection has only been diagnosed in life in one patient (by echocardiography).
Normal angiograms and carotid pathology.  Nonstenotic ulcerated atherosclerotic plaques of the carotid arteries may be associated with symptoms of transient ischemic attacks, amaurosis fugax, and stroke.  Preoperative evaluation of patients with these symptoms has traditionally included ultrasound and arch aortography angiograms of the area of the carotid bifurcation.  Recent evidence has shown that ultrasound is more accurate in detection and morphologic delineation of these nonstenotic lesions.  We analyzed the hospital records of 21 patients with ultrasonographic evidence of disease in whom arteriograms were negative.  The patient group comprised 15 men and six women, with an average of 66 years.  All patients had symptoms of hemispheric transient ischemic attacks and were evaluated with B-mode ultrasound and arteriography.  Ultrasound was positive and arteriogram "negative" in all of the patients (i.e., described by the radiologist as without hemodynamic significant disease or ulceration, or as normal).  The ultrasound diagnosis was confirmed at operation with findings of 20 to 50 per cent stenosis and ulcerative plaques.  At retrospective review of the arteriograms, three ulcerations were found in the 21 patients.  We conclude that B-mode ultrasound better defines nonstenotic ulcerative lesions and decisions to perform carotid endarterectomy may be based on either positive test.  An ulcerative plaque by B-mode ultrasound and appropriate symptoms, therefore, may not require angiography before operation.
Selection of patients with acute myocardial infarction for thrombolytic therapy   PURPOSE: To critically review the current recommendations regarding the eligibility of patients with myocardial infarction for thrombolytic therapy.  DATA IDENTIFICATION: Relevant studies published from January 1980 to January 1990 were identified through a computerized search of the English-language literature using MEDLINE and by a manual search of the bibliographies of all identified articles.  STUDY SELECTION: All randomized, controlled trials of intravenous thrombolysis in acute myocardial infarction and unstable angina were reviewed.  Smaller, observational studies and previous review articles were included when relevant to the discussion.  DATA EXTRACTION: Key data were extracted from each article, including the proportions of patients eligible for thrombolysis, the reasons for exclusion from thrombolytic therapy, and the clinical outcomes of patients treated and of those excluded from treatment.  The validity of certain exclusion criteria was examined using subgroup analysis from the large, randomized mortality trials of intravenous thrombolysis and observations from smaller, nonrandomized studies.  RESULTS OF DATA SYNTHESIS: To date, relatively few patients with myocardial infarction have been considered eligible for fibrinolytic therapy.  In this group, both early and late mortality have been significantly reduced.  Patients excluded from thrombolysis, however, continue to have a high early mortality.  The data suggest that the potential benefits of this treatment might be extended to selected high-risk subgroups.  In particular, the risk-benefit ratio may favor the inclusion of otherwise healthy elderly patients; certain patients presenting more than 6 hours after the onset of symptoms; and patients with a history of controlled systolic hypertension or brief, nontraumatic cardiopulmonary resuscitation.  The data do not support the use of fibrinolytic therapy as primary treatment in patients with unstable angina or suspected myocardial infarction in the absence of confirmatory electrocardiographic changes.  CONCLUSIONS: The full potential of thrombolytic therapy to alter the natural history of acute myocardial infarction can only be realized through the continued evaluation of selection criteria and the identification and treatment of the greatest possible number of eligible patients.
Effect of intravenous streptokinase on early mortality in patients with suspected acute myocardial infarction. A meta-analysis by anatomic location of infarction  [published erratum appears in Ann Intern Med 1991 Mar 15;114(6):522]   PURPOSE: To determine the effect of intravenous streptokinase on early mortality in patients with suspected acute anterior and acute inferior myocardial infarctions.  DATA IDENTIFICATION: A literature search of English-language studies on the use of intravenous streptokinase in the treatment of suspected acute myocardial infarction for the period 1966 to 1989 using Medlars II and the bibliographies of relevant articles.  In a number of instances, additional details on early mortality by location of myocardial infarction were provided by the authors.  STUDY SELECTION: Of 140 originally identified articles, 6 that specifically met our inclusion criteria were selected: randomized trials that used intravenous streptokinase in a dose of 1.5 million units, with or without additional agents, compared with a group that differed only by the absence of streptokinase.  Trials were selected by review of the methods section without regard for the results.  DATA EXTRACTION: Data were extracted independently by two observers using specific methodologic criteria for infarct location and early mortality.  After they conferred, the observers agreed completely on the data.  RESULTS OF DATA SYNTHESIS: Among the 9155 patients with suspected acute anterior myocardial infarction, the mortality rate in the control group was 17.4%.  In contrast, patients treated with streptokinase had a 12.5% mortality.  The mean risk difference was -4.8% (95% CI, -7.5% to -2.1%) and the summary risk ratio was 0.72 (CI, 0.65 to 0.79).  A total of 9650 patients with suspected inferior infarction had a mortality rate in the control group of 7.6% [corrected].  The mortality for streptokinase-treated patients was 6.6%.  The mean risk difference was -0.8% (CI, -1.8% to 0.2%) and the summary risk ratio was 0.87 (CI, 0.76 to 1.01).  CONCLUSIONS: Intravenous streptokinase clearly confers a protective effect against early mortality in patients with suspected acute anterior myocardial infarction.  The magnitude of this effect is on the order of a 5% absolute reduction in risk of death by 21 to 35 days.  For these patients, 21 need to be treated to save 1 additional life.  For patients with suspected acute inferior infarction, the benefit of treatment on reducing early mortality is of smaller magnitude and less certain.  These patients have an estimated absolute reduction of early mortality of approximately 1%, which would require treating 125 patients to save 1 additional life.
Electroencephalography laboratory diagnosis of prolonged QT interval.  Patients with prolongation of the QT interval are at risk for significant neurological morbidity and mortality secondary to ventricular tachyarrhythmias.  These patients frequently undergo electroencephalographic (EEG) examination to evaluate episodes of loss of consciousness, which may be associated with convulsions.  Electrocardiogram recording as a part of the EEG is a simple and common practice, but analysis for possible QT prolongation is not routinely performed by electroencephalographers.  This is, in part, due to the fact that while calculation of the corrected QT interval is straight forward, a calculator is generally required.  A nomogram that is presented simplifies determination of the corrected QT interval, facilitating diagnosis of prolongation of the QT interval in the EEG laboratory.
Repair of supravalvar aortic stenosis: cardiovascular morphometric and hemodynamic results.  Supravalvar aortic stenosis is associated with normal systolic pressure in the aorta and its branches with the singular exception of the coronary arteries, which are hypertensive.  This uncommon lesion has been treated by patch aortoplasty of several types.  We examined hemodynamics and morphometrics in 13 patients who underwent operation for supravalvar aortic stenosis from 1979 through 1988.  They ranged in age from 2 to 43 years (mean age, 14.5 +/- 3.8 years [+/- standard error of the mean]).  There were no operative deaths.  Preoperative and postoperative (1 to 5 years) catheterization or echocardiography or a combination of these was done in all but 3 patients (1 died late suddenly without a postmortem examination; 1 was lost to follow-up; and 1 has not yet been restudied).  Pressure gradients across the stenosis in patients treated with a single-sinus patch (n = 4) were 65 +/- 18 mm Hg preoperatively and 5 +/- 3 mm Hg postoperatively (p less than 0.05) and in patients with a bisinus patch (n = 6), 83 +/- 15 mm Hg preoperatively and 6 +/- 2 mm Hg postoperatively (p less than 0.05); the two groups were not significantly different.  Measurements of the diameters of the coronary arteries, aortic annulus, and descending aorta were made, and calculation of the ratio of the coronary artery and annulus diameters to the descending aortic diameters both preoperatively and postoperatively was possible in 5 patients.  The left coronary artery was larger than normal before and after operation.  Preoperatively there was a disproportionate increase in left coronary artery and annulus size during systole.  Left ventricular wall thickness decreased significantly postoperatively (p less than 0.05).  Repair of supravalvar aortic stenosis (localized and diffuse) by both single sinus and bisinus patch repair is safe and hemodynamic results are good.
Clinical performance of St. Jude and Medtronic-Hall prostheses: a randomized comparative study.  Newer and improved models of mechanical prostheses are regularly added to surgeons' armamentarium.  This study was designed to compare the clinical performance of two of the most used current models of mechanical prostheses.  From August 1983 through July 1985, 182 white patients were prospectively randomized to implantation of the St.  Jude Medical (95 patients) or Medtronic-Hall (87 patients) prostheses.  There were 84 mitral, 85 aortic, and 13 double (mitral and aortic) valve replacements.  There were no differences between the two groups with regard to sex distribution, age, functional class, emergency operation, and site of implantation.  Early mortality was 3.2% for patients with the St.  Jude valve and 5.7% for those with the Medtronic-Hall (p = NS).  The survivors were followed for 3 to 5 years (mean, 4.2 +/- 0.6 years; cumulative follow-up, 559 patient-years).  Late mortality was 7.1%/patient-year for the St.  Jude group and 3.2%/patient-year for the Medtronic-Hall group (p less than 0.05).  However, the valve-related mortality was equal (1.4%/patient-year) for both groups.  Noncardiac causes accounted for most of the difference between the St.  Jude and Medtronic-Hall groups (2.5%/patient-year and 0.4%/patient-year, respectively).  There were no cases of thrombotic obstruction, whereas serious systemic thromboembolism occurred at the rate of 1.8%/patient-year (5 episodes) for the St.  Jude group and 2.5%/patient-year (7 episodes) for the Medtronic-Hall group (p = not significant); there were another nine episodes of systemic embolism that left no sequelae.  Three patients (St.  Jude, 2; Medtronic-Hall, 1), all of whom had aortic valve replacement, required reoperation (0.5%/patient-year) because of prosthetic endocarditis, with two deaths.
Prolonged extracorporeal life support of pediatric and adolescent cardiac transplant patients.  Options for mechanical support of pediatric patients with severe heart failure who are awaiting transplantation or have undergone transplantation are limited.  This report examines 3 patients placed on extracorporeal life support (ECLS) while awaiting transplantation and 3 patients who underwent transplantation and suffered subsequent heart failure due to rejection or postoperative myocardial dysfunction.  The overall survival rate was 2 of 6.  The 2 surviving patients had a failing transplanted heart.  There were no survivors among the patients placed on ECLS as a bridge to transplantation.  In each case a contraindication to transplantation developed before a donor heart could be obtained.  The mean time of ECLS support was 147.5 hours (range, 70 to 370 hours).  The ECLS circuit did not affect cyclosporin levels or antirejection therapy.  Extracorporeal life support can be used to support pediatric cardiac transplant patients with biventricular failure due to acute rejection or postoperative dysfunction.  Although the results have been discouraging, ECLS may still have a role as a bridge to transplantation.  However, complications can develop during ECLS that may preclude transplantation.
Tension pneumopericardium as a complication of single-lung transplantation.  Tension pneumopericardium is distinctly uncommon in the adult population.  We present a case of tension pneumopericardium as a complication of lung transplantation in a 54-year-old woman with thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension who underwent single-lung transplantation.
New technique for the arterial switch operation in difficult situations.  The technique described here, a modification of the Aubert operation, avoids coronary reimplantation and also eliminates the need to use artificial material to transfer coronary circulation.
Postinfarction ventricular septal defect repair: retrospective thoughts and historical perspectives.  Evolution of surgical techniques for repair of postinfarction ventricular septal rupture initially involved differentiation of these lesions from prior experience with surgical approaches to congenital ventricular septal defects, which were in the main not applicable.  Second, understanding of the differing anatomical locations of postinfarction ventricular septal defects required innovation in terms of the location of the cardiotomy and type of repair necessary to achieve a successful result in any given patient.  The gradual appreciation of different clinical courses pursued by patients after postinfarction ventricular septal rupture both in terms of location of the defect and the degree of right ventricular functional impairment has led to increased urgency relative to the timing of surgical repair.  The incorporation of specific anatomical concepts of surgical repair and better understanding of the time course of physiological deterioration of patients can ultimately lead to an integrated approach aimed toward improved salvage of patients suffering this catastrophic complication of acute myocardial infarction.
Repair of flail anterior leaflets of tricuspid and mitral valves by cusp remodeling.  We present an alternative approach to extensive rupture of the chordae tendineae leading to flail anterior leaflets.  Resection of the affected cusp segment, suture of the cut edges, and extensive plication of the segment of annulus devoid of leaflets abolished massive regurgitation while maintaining an adequate valve orifice.
Cardioplegia-induced damage to ischemic immature myocardium is independent of oxygen availability.  The known benefits of hypothermic pharmacological cardioplegia in protecting the ischemic adult heart may not extend to children.  Protection of the ischemic immature rabbit heart with hypothermic Krebs-Henseleit bicarbonate buffer is better than with hypothermic St.  Thomas' II cardioplegic solution.  We investigated whether the availability of oxygen in the preischemic perfusate is responsible for the increased tolerance to ischemia of immature (7- to 10-day-old) hearts perfused with Krebs buffer in comparison with St.  Thomas' II solution immediately before ischemia.  After obtaining preischemic control data in the "working" mode, we perfused hearts (n = 8 per group) for 3 minutes with hypothermic (14 degrees C) Krebs buffer or hypothermic St.  Thomas' II solution saturated with 0%, 25%, or 95% oxygen.  This was followed by 2 hours of global ischemia at 14 degrees C.  Hearts were reperfused for 15 minutes in the Langendorff mode and 35 minutes in the working mode, and recovery of function was measured.  For preischemic oxygen concentrations of 0%, 25%, and 95%, recovery of aortic flow in hearts protected by hypothermia alone during ischemia was 74% +/- 9%, 82% +/- 4%, and 99% +/- 2% of preischemic values, respectively.  In hearts protected by hypothermia plus cardioplegia, the values were 69% +/- 6%, 72% +/- 3%, and 86% +/- 5%, respectively.  Thus, at equal oxygen concentrations, recovery of postischemic function was better in hearts protected by hypothermia alone compared with hypothermia plus cardioplegia.  We conclude that factors other than oxygen availability are responsible for the damaging effect of St.  Thomas' II solution on the ischemic immature rabbit heart.
The relationship between sex hormones and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels in healthy adult men.  The objective of this study was to clarify the complex and uncertain relationship between endogenous sex hormones and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels in healthy men.  Fifty-five healthy adult men were consecutively recruited from an ongoing cross-sectional study of cardiovascular disease risk factors from a lipid research clinic at the University of Washington, Seattle.  Subjects receiving medication were excluded.  Multiple linear regression analysis identified several factors that correlated highly significantly with HDL cholesterol levels, including alcohol intake; frequency of strenuous exercise; age; levels of total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and triglyceride; and carbohydrate intake.  Nearly 80% of the heterogeneity in HDL cholesterol levels could be accounted for by these factors.  Despite finding significant correlations with factors known to influence HDL cholesterol levels, no correlation with estradiol level, testosterone level, or the ratio of estradiol to testosterone levels was apparent.  In conclusion, endogenous sex hormones do not appear to influence HDL cholesterol levels in healthy adult men.  Alternatively, a large proportion of the heterogeneity in HDL levels in this group of men can be accounted for by environmental factors.  The disparity between this conclusion and others may be partially due to differences in accounting for these confounding variables.
Evaluation of methods for detecting venous reflux. Perspectives in venous insufficiency.  Using 793 limbs with nonobstructive venous reflux, we evaluated a number of techniques used for the assessment of venous reflux.  The venous Doppler examination was found to be a reliable screening tool with excellent sensitivity and good specificity.  Photoplethysmography was 97% sensitive in patients with ambulatory venous hypertension; however, in milder forms of reflux, it was less sensitive.  The major drawback of photoplethysmography was the large number of false-positive results obtained.  Ambulatory venous pressure measurement and another pressure-based technique, Valsalva-induced foot venous pressure measurement, defined overlapping but different normal and abnormal limbs.  Descending venography, when performed as described by Kistner et al, was found to be a reliable tool to assess reflux with more than a 90% sensitivity.  The horizontal technique of performing descending venography and nucleotide descending venographies had unacceptably low sensitivity and were abandoned.  Features of venous reflux as outlined by these modern technical tools are described.
Prevalence of symptoms of Raynaud's phenomenon in general practice.  OBJECTIVE--To investigate the prevalence of Raynaud's phenomenon in the populations of five general practices.  DESIGN--Two populations studied.  A questionnaire was given to all new patients attending five general practices over four weeks, and the same questionnaire was sent by post to a random sample of adults from two of the practices.  SETTING--General practices in inner London, Merseyside, and Cheshire.  SUBJECTS--1532 Patients who completed questionnaires (1119 who attended the surgeries (response rate unknown) and 413 respondents to the postal survey (response rate 69%)).  MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES--Response to questionnaire on symptoms of Raynaud's phenomenon: patients were regarded as having the disease if they had episodes of blanching of the fingers that were precipitated by cold and accompanied by sensory symptoms (pins and needles or numbness).  Subsequent interview and clinical appraisal of patients with the disease according to their responses to the questionnaire.  RESULTS--The prevalence of Raynaud's phenomenon was 11% (26/231) and 19% (34/182) respectively in men and women who completed the postal questionnaire and 16% (56/357) and 21% (157/762) respectively in those who completed the questionnaire when attending their general practice.  Thus the overall rates were slightly higher in women, but there was no effect of age even after adjustment of the rates for practice and method of survey.  CONCLUSION--The prevalence of Raynaud's phenomenon is high compared with the low number of patients who seek treatment for the disease.
Current status of antitachycardia devices.  With the limitations of currently available modalities for treating clinically important tachycardias, the role of implanted antitachycardia devices will continue to expand.  The challenge of the future will not only involve continued technological advances but the socioeconomic impact of this efficacious but expensive mode of therapy in an era of increasing financial restraints.  Further studies to definitively prove the efficacy of more widespread use of antitachycardia device therapy will be needed.
An analysis of randomized trials evaluating the effect of cholesterol reduction on total mortality and coronary heart disease incidence.  The primary aim of this study was to estimate the relation between cholesterol reduction and total mortality and coronary heart disease (CHD) incidence.  Secondarily, the clinical issues of whether the efficacy of cholesterol lowering is dependent on the treatment modality, presence of CHD at baseline, or the simultaneous introduction of other interventions was explored.  All randomized clinical intervention trials of cholesterol reduction were used in an overview analysis of total mortality rate and CHD incidence; analysis was performed with weighted linear regression.  The trials include those that used primary and secondary intervention, diet and drugs, and single or multifactor design.  Nineteen trials were analyzed for total mortality, and of the 19, 16 were analyzed for CHD incidence rate.  Net difference in cholesterol change between study groups was used as the independent variable, and the three previously mentioned dichotomous design characteristics were used as additional independent variables.  For every 1% reduction in cholesterol, an estimated 2.5% reduction in CHD incidence is indicated (95% CL: 1.1, 3.9).  With regard to CHD drug trials tended toward better efficiency in cholesterol lowering than did dietary trials.  With regard to total mortality, this efficiency was higher in secondary than in primary preventive trials.  The efficiency was also somewhat dependent on the baseline cholesterol level.  This study shows that cholesterol reduction is effective in lowering CHD incidence, but cholesterol reduction must be at least 8-9% to be effective in lowering total mortality.
Intermittent claudication, heart disease risk factors, and mortality. The Whitehall Study   In the Whitehall study, 18,388 subjects aged 40-64 years completed a questionnaire on intermittent claudication.  Of these subjects, 0.8% (147) and 1% (175) were deemed to have probable intermittent claudication and possible intermittent claudication, respectively.  Within the 17-year follow-up period, 38% and 40% of the probable and possible cases, respectively, died.  Compared with subjects without claudication, the probable cases suffered increased mortality rates due to coronary heart disease and cerebrovascular disease, but the mortality rate due to noncardiovascular causes was not increased.  Possible cases demonstrated increased mortality rates due to cardiovascular and noncardiovascular causes.  This difference in mortality pattern may be due to chance.  Possible and probable cases still showed increased cardiovascular and all-cause mortality rates after adjusting for coronary risk factors (cardiac ischemia at baseline, systolic blood pressure, plasma cholesterol concentration, smoking behavior, employment grade, and degree of glucose intolerance).  Intermittent claudication is independently related to increased mortality rates.  It is not a rare condition, and simple questionnaires exist for its detection.  The latter can be usefully incorporated in cardiovascular risk assessment and screening programs.
Inotropic effects of angiotensin II on human cardiac muscle in vitro.  The direct effects of angiotensin II (Ang II) on human cardiac muscle were investigated using isolated trabecular muscles from failing and functionally normal hearts.  Atrial and ventricular trabeculae were studied.  Results demonstrated a positive inotropic effect of Ang II on human cardiac muscle.  Comparison of the effects of Ang II among groups indicated that the responsiveness tended to be greater in atrial and normal muscle compared with failing muscle.  Results of this study also demonstrated heterogeneity in the responsiveness to Ang II among human muscles, which was not correlated with patient age, sex, diagnosis, prior treatment with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, or heart function.  A significant correlation between response to Ang II and response to isoproterenol was demonstrated in failing ventricular trabeculae, which may suggest that defects in beta-adrenergic responsiveness in the failing human ventricle are accompanied by a loss of responsiveness to Ang II.  Studies were extended to the Syrian cardiomyopathic hamster and its control.  A dose-dependent inotropic response occurred in normal hamster ventricular muscle but was significantly diminished in cardiomyopathic muscle.  Ang II did not shorten the timing of contraction, and pretreatment with adrenergic-blocking agents did not shift the dose-response curve, indicating that the response was not cyclic AMP mediated.  This study demonstrates for the first time that Ang II can exert an inotropic effect directly on human cardiac muscle and confirms that there is a direct effect of Ang II on hamster cardiac muscle.  The study further suggests, however, that the inotropic response to Ang II in cardiac muscle is heterogeneous and may be diminished by heart failure.
Functional chiral asymmetry in descending thoracic aorta   To determine whether rotational blood flow or chiral asymmetry exists in the human descending thoracic aorta, we established the ability of color Doppler ultrasound to detect rotational flow in a tornado tube model of a vortex descending fluid column.  In a model of the human aortic arch with a pulse duplicator, color Doppler was then used to demonstrate that rotational flow occurs first in the transverse arch and then in the proximal descending thoracic aorta.  With the use of color Doppler esophageal echocardiography, 53 patients (age range, 25-78 years; mean age, 56.4 years) were prospectively examined for rotational flow in the descending thoracic aorta.  At 10 cm superior to retro-left ventricular position, 22 of 38 patients (58%) revealed rotational flow with obvious diastolic counterclockwise rotation but less obvious systolic clockwise rotation.  At 5 cm superior to retro-left ventricular position, 29 of 46 patients (63%) revealed rotational flow with a tendency toward systolic clockwise and diastolic counterclockwise rotation.  At the retro-left ventricular position, 47 of 53 patients (89%) revealed rotational flow, usually of a clockwise direction, occurring in systole.  Our data suggest that aortic flow is not purely pulsatile and axial but has a rotational component.  Rotational flow begins in the aortic arch and is carried through to the descending thoracic aorta, where flow is chirally asymmetric with systolic clockwise and diastolic counterclockwise components.  These data demonstrate an aortic rotational flow component that may have physiological implications for organ perfusion.
Abnormal blood pressure response during exercise in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.  To investigate the incidence of abnormal exercise blood pressure responses in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and the potential role of hemodynamic instability as a mechanism of sudden death, 129 consecutive patients with HCM underwent maximal symptom-limited treadmill exercise testing with blood pressure recording.  Four patterns of blood pressure response were observed.  Forty-three patients had significant exercise hypotension, with either a continuous fall in systolic blood pressure (n = 5) from the start of exercise or a sudden fall in systolic blood pressure (20-100 mm Hg; mean, 40 mm Hg) from the peak value (n = 38), 23 patients had a normal response during exercise but an abnormal blood pressure response in the recovery period, and the remaining 62 patients demonstrated a normal blood pressure response.  Patients with exercise hypotension were younger (33 +/- 14 versus 46 +/- 14 years) and more of them had a family history of HCM and sudden death compared with those with a normal blood pressure response (15 of 43 versus 6 of 62 patients).  Similarly, the 23 patients with abnormal recovery blood pressure responses were younger (43 +/- 16 versus 46 +/- 14 years) and had a higher incidence of a family history of sudden death (10 of 24 versus 6 of 62 patients).  Left ventricular cavity dimensions were smaller in those with exercise hypotension, but 11 other clinical, echocardiographic, and arrhythmic variables were similar.  To assess the mechanism of exercise hypotension, 14 patients who demonstrated exercise hypotension and 14 symptomatic patients with a normal exercise blood pressure response underwent invasive hemodynamic exercise testing.
Beta-adrenergic receptors in lymphocyte subsets after exercise. Alterations in normal individuals and patients with congestive heart failure.  Dynamic exercise increases the number of beta-adrenergic receptors in mixed lymphocytes by a mechanism that is incompletely understood.  In a set of in vivo studies, we have investigated the effects of dynamic exercise on the subset distribution of circulating lymphocytes and on the number of beta-adrenergic receptors in each of these subsets in two groups of patients.  In healthy subjects, exercise increased plasma norepinephrine and epinephrine and caused lymphocytosis.  Whereas the number of Thelper cells increased only modestly, the number of Tsuppressor/cytotoxic and natural killer cells more than tripled.  The number of beta-adrenergic receptors varied among subsets but was not significantly altered by dynamic exercise in any subset except natural killer cells (35% increase, p = 0.0302).  In a group of patients with congestive heart failure, dynamic exercise increased plasma norepinephrine but did not alter plasma epinephrine and did not cause significant lymphocytosis.  We did not detect any significant alterations of circulating leukocyte subsets or beta-adrenergic receptors in any of these subsets after exercise.  A combined analysis of healthy patients and heart failure patients revealed a significant correlation between increases in plasma epinephrine and increases in circulating lymphocytes.  We conclude that the exercise-induced increase in beta-adrenergic receptors of mixed lymphocytes is predominantly caused by a redistribution of circulating cell subsets that differ in their beta-adrenergic receptor number.  This appears to be mediated by epinephrine rather than norepinephrine.
Prostacyclin and acetylcholine as screening agents for acute pulmonary vasodilator responsiveness in primary pulmonary hypertension.  Epoprostenol sodium (prostacyclin) administered intravenously is considered the standard for assessing the ability of the pulmonary circulation to vasodilate.  At present, epoprostenol sodium is an investigational drug that has limited availability.  In contrast, acetylcholine, also a pulmonary vasodilator, is readily available.  Therefore, we assessed the feasibility of using acetylcholine as an alternative to prostacyclin in testing for the capacity of the pulmonary vasculature to vasodilate.  Twenty-three patients with primary pulmonary hypertension (mean pulmonary arterial pressure, 58.5 +/- 13.4 mm Hg) received incremental infusions of prostacyclin and acetylcholine to predetermined maximal infusion rates as part of a battery of vasodilator agents administered according to standard protocols (mean, 5.4 +/- 1.2 agents/patient; range, 3-8 agents/patient); the administration of the different agents was timed to avoid synergistic effects.  Of all the agents tested, prostacyclin and acetylcholine were most consistently effective in evoking acute pulmonary vasodilation, and both seemed to distinguish patients capable of manifesting acute pulmonary vasodilation from those who were not.  However, at maximal doses set by protocol, prostacyclin generally elicited a greater vasodilator response than acetylcholine.  The difference in magnitude of response may have been due to use of prescribed dosages of acetylcholine that were submaximal.  In other respects, the two agents were similar; both were equally well-tolerated, and side effects were mild and resolved rapidly when the vasodilator infusions were stopped.  We conclude that in the majority of patients with primary pulmonary hypertension, acetylcholine appears to be an effective and available substitute for prostacyclin in screening for pulmonary vasodilator responsiveness.
Differentiation of ventricular tachyarrhythmias.  Implantable devices capable of several modes of therapy will require differentiation of various ventricular tachyarrhythmias.  Three methods of arrhythmia analysis, magnitude-squared coherence, ventricular rate, and irregularity of cycle length were performed for 45 episodes of induced ventricular tachyarrhythmia in 15 patients.  Differentiation of monomorphic ventricular tachycardia from polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation was possible by mean magnitude-squared coherence, less possible by rate, and not possible by beat-to-beat irregularity.  Faster monomorphic ventricular tachycardia overlapped with rates of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation.  Differentiation of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation was not possible by rate or irregularity.  A progressive decrease in mean magnitude-squared coherence from monomorphic ventricular tachycardia to polymorphic ventricular tachycardia to ventricular fibrillation strengthens previous observations that coherence is a measure of rhythm "organization.".
Adaptation to ischemia during percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty. Clinical, hemodynamic, and metabolic features   The clinical, electrocardiographic, and coronary hemodynamic responses to sequential 90-second occlusions of the left anterior descending coronary artery in 12 patients undergoing elective percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty were examined.  Transmyocardial lactate metabolism was examined in an additional group of seven patients with clinical and hemodynamic features similar to the first group.  We noted that in comparison with the initial balloon occlusion the second occlusion was characterized by less subjective anginal discomfort, less ST segment shift (0.44 +/- 0.13 versus 0.21 +/- 0.07 mV, p = 0.01), and lower mean pulmonary artery pressure (25 +/- 1.0 versus 20 +/- 1.7 mm Hg, p = 0.005).  In addition, for the same heart rate-blood pressure product, cardiac vein flow during the second inflation was significantly lower than that recorded during the first inflation (96 +/- 1.4 versus 83 +/- 2.4 ml/min, p = 0.005).  Finally, there was significantly less myocardial lactate production during the second inflation (lactate extraction ratio: first inflation, -0.11 +/- 0.03; second inflation, -0.03 +/- 0.02; p = 0.04).  We conclude that the lessened clinical, electrocardiographic, hemodynamic, and metabolic evidence of myocardial ischemia during the second of two periods of coronary artery occlusion during percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty supports the concept of adaptation to myocardial ischemia (ischemic preconditioning).
Intracoronary urokinase for intracoronary thrombus accumulation complicating percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty in acute ischemic syndromes.  Intracoronary urokinase was used to treat flow-limiting intracoronary thrombus accumulation that complicated successful percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) during acute ischemic syndromes in 48 patients who were followed up through the acute phase of their illness.  The study group comprised 10 patients with unstable angina pectoris, 18 patients with an evolving acute myocardial infarction, and 20 patients with postinfarction angina.  The initial mean percent coronary diameter stenosis for the entire population was 95 +/- 7% and decreased with initial PTCA to 41 +/- 20% (p less than 0.001), with improved corresponding coronary flow by Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction trial (TIMI) grade.  However, thrombus accumulation then resulted in a significant increase in percent diameter stenosis to 83 +/- 17% (p less than 0.001); a corresponding significant reduction in coronary flow also occurred by TIMI grade.  After administration of intracoronary urokinase (mean dose, 141,000 units; range, 100,000-250,000 units during an average period of 34 minutes), with additional PTCA, mean percent diameter stenosis significantly decreased to 34 +/- 17% (p less than 0.001); a correspondingly significant improvement in mean coronary flow by TIMI grade occurred to 2.9 +/- 0.2.  Overall, the angiographic success rate was 90%.  There were no ischemic events requiring repeat PTCA and no procedure-related myocardial infarctions or deaths before hospital discharge.  One patient was referred for urgent coronary artery bypass graft surgery after a successful PTCA.  Plasma fibrinogen levels were obtained in 15 patients, and in no patient was the level below normal for our laboratory.
Coronary atherosclerosis is associated with left ventricular dysfunction and dilatation in aortic stenosis.  Patients with aortic stenosis develop widely variable patterns of left ventricular hypertrophy and dysfunction.  We postulated that coronary atherosclerosis (CAD) may be associated with impaired left ventricular function and chamber dilatation in patients with aortic stenosis.  Left ventricular mass and volumes were quantified from two-dimensional echocardiography and correlated with coronary angiography in 78 patients with severe aortic stenosis and no previous myocardial infarction or regional wall motion abnormalities.  Eighteen patients (group 1) had smooth coronary arteries, 25 patients had irregular coronary arteries with 50% or less stenosis (group 2), and 35 patients had obstructive CAD (group 3).  Even though the calculated valve area was similar in all three study groups, group 1 patients had higher values for ejection fraction (65 +/- 9%, 51 +/- 17%, and 48 +/- 13%; p = 0.0002), systolic mass-to-volume ratio (9.2 +/- 3.9, 5.6 +/- 2.8, and 5.2 +/- 2.2; p = 0.0001), and cardiac index (2.9 +/- 0.7, 2.5 +/- 0.7, and 2.3 +/- 0.6 l/min.min2; p = 0.015) than patients in groups 2 and 3, respectively (mean +/- SD).  Mean circumferential wall stress was inversely related to severity of CAD.  Multivariate analysis showed that CAD is an independent predictor of ejection fraction and mass-to-volume ratio in this group of patients.  Thus, in an elderly population with severe aortic stenosis, patients with both obstructive and nonobstructive CAD have an increased incidence of left ventricular enlargement and systolic dysfunction.
Left ventricular regional wall stress in dilated cardiomyopathy.  Left ventriculography with simultaneous pressure micromanometry was performed in 11 normal control subjects and 17 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM).  Left ventricular silhouettes in the right anterior oblique projection were divided into eight areas, and regional wall stress was computed by Janz's method in each area excluding the two most basal areas.  Wall stress was higher in DCM patients than in control subjects (p less than 0.01).  The percent area changes from end diastole to end systole in each area were lower in DCM patients than in control subjects (mean for six areas, 22 +/- 14% versus 54 +/- 9%, respectively, p less than 0.01), but the coefficient of variation for the percent area changes in the six areas of the left ventricle in DCM patients was greater than that in control subjects (32 +/- 17% versus 15 +/- 4%, respectively, p less than 0.01), indicating regional differences in hypokinesis.  There was a significant negative correlation between end-systolic regional wall stress and percent area change (r = -0.60 to -0.86, p less than 0.05) in each area.  Thus, excessive regional afterload may play an important role in causing regional hypokinesis in DCM.
Body surface mapping of high-frequency components in the terminal portion during QRS complex for the prediction of ventricular tachycardia in patients with previous myocardial infarction.  To study the clinical significance of terminal QRS high-frequency components for the prediction of ventricular tachycardia, an 87-lead body surface signal-averaged mapping was performed in 21 healthy subjects (control) and in 41 patients with previous myocardial infarction (anterior, 20; inferior, 21).  Mapping data were analyzed and averaged (129.7 +/- 26.5 beats) for 160 seconds, and the signal-averaged beat was filtered with a bidirectional bandwidth (80-250 Hz) digital filter.  J-point was determined from the 87-lead RMS voltage of nonfiltered QRS.  For each lead, we calculated the sum of the absolute value of filtered QRS from 20 msec ahead of the J-point to the J-point (A-20).  The body surface distribution of A-20 was expressed as A-20 map.  The maxima in A-20 maps were mainly located on the upper sternal region in healthy subjects, on the left anterior chest in patients with previous anterior myocardial infarction, and on the central anterior chest in patients with previous inferior myocardial infarction.  In the patients in both the group with anterior myocardial infarction and the group with inferior myocardial infarction, the value of maximum was significantly greater than in the subjects in the control group (0.181 +/- 0.086 and 0.138 +/- 0.048, respectively, vs.  0.075 +/- 0.031 mV.msec; p less than 0.01).  In patients with myocardial infarction (n = 41), the value of maximum was significantly greater with ventricular tachycardia (n = 11) than without ventricular tachycardia (n = 30) (0.240 +/- 0.076 vs.  0.130 +/- 0.043 mV.msec; p less than 0.01).
Area-at-risk determination by technetium-99m-hexakis-2-methoxyisobutyl isonitrile in experimental reperfused myocardial infarction   In a canine model of reperfused myocardial infarction, we tested the hypothesis that after reperfusion, technetium-99m-hexakis-2-methoxyisobutyl isonitrile (Tc-MIBI) tomographic imaging still reflects occlusion blood flow when the tracer is injected before reperfusion.  Nine anesthetized dogs underwent 2 hours of coronary occlusion followed by 3 hours of reperfusion ending by being killed.  Reference coronary blood flow was determined by radioactive microspheres injected during occlusion and after reperfusion.  Biopsies in normal and ischemic myocardium and single photon emission computed tomography were obtained during occlusion and after reperfusion.  Circumferential profiles were applied to axial slices divided into 5-degree sectors.  The sectors were divided into 3 groups selected on the occlusion acquisition (normal, mildly reduced, and severely reduced) and compared with the postreperfusion acquisition.  Tissular Tc-MIBI kinetics was assessed both by Tc-MIBI time-activity curves of normal and ischemic tissue obtained by biopsy and by the relative gradient between normal, ischemic, and necrotic postmortem tissue samples.  In biopsy samples, Tc-MIBI content remained unchanged during occlusion and after reperfusion in normal as well as in ischemic tissue (4,662 +/- 2,237 counts/min/mg vs.  4,599 +/- 1,577 counts/min/mg in normal tissue, NS; 941 +/- 903 counts/min/mg vs.  1,087 +/- 721 counts/min/mg in ischemic tissue, NS).  In postmortem tissue samples, there was a good correlation between occlusion microsphere blood flow and Tc-MIBI activity (r = 0.91).  In the necrotic samples, mean normalized Tc-MIBI activity (10 +/- 17%) was slightly higher than the normalized microsphere blood flow (3 +/- 3%, p less than 0.001) but markedly lower than the normalized microsphere reperfusion blood flow (63 +/- 31%, p less than 0.001).  Comparing the single photon emission computed tomographic acquisitions before and after reperfusion, Tc-MIBI activity remained unchanged in normal as well as in mildly reduced or severely reduced segments.  Thus, our data are consistent with the hypothesis that Tc-MIBI traces blood flow, does not redistribute significantly despite reperfusion, and can be used for imaging the area at risk.
Effects of brief coronary occlusion and reperfusion on porcine coronary artery reactivity.  The loss of coronary vasodilator reserve after ischemia-reperfusion may be due to endothelial injury, and this vascular dysfunction may contribute to functional alterations observed after ischemia.  To determine whether endothelial dysfunction occurs after relatively brief periods of moderate low-flow ischemia in vivo, open-chest swine were subjected to 15 minutes of critical, subtotal left anterior descending coronary artery occlusion (80%) followed by 60 minutes of reperfusion.  Serial measurements of regional coronary flow were made with the radiolabeled microsphere technique.  After 60 minutes of reperfusion, the left anterior descending coronary artery was excised together with a section of the normally perfused left circumflex coronary artery to examine in vitro the relaxations to the endothelium-dependent dilators ADP and bradykinin and to the endothelial-independent dilators sodium nitroprusside and adenosine.  Contractions to serotonin in quiescent rings were also examined.  Endocardial and transmural blood flows recovered to preocclusion levels within 60 minutes of reperfusion, as did the epicardial-to-endocardial ratio.  Vascular responses in isolated, reperfused left anterior descending coronary artery rings were significantly different from responses in control left circumflex coronary artery rings.  Endothelium-dependent relaxations to adenosine diphosphate and bradykinin were significantly depressed in the left anterior descending coronary artery rings compared with left circumflex coronary artery rings (p less than 0.05).  Serotonin-induced contractions were significantly greater in occluded-reperfused left anterior descending than in left circumflex coronary arteries (p less than 0.05).  Relaxations to adenosine and sodium nitroprusside were not significantly different between the two groups.
Fibrinopeptide A is released into the coronary circulation after coronary spasm.  To examine whether acute myocardial ischemia activates the coagulation system and platelet activation in the coronary circulation, we measured plasma levels of fibrinopeptide A and beta-thromboglobulin in the coronary sinus and the aortic root simultaneously in 15 patients with coronary spastic angina before and after the left coronary spasm induced by intracoronary injection of acetylcholine and in 15 patients with stable exertional angina before and after acute myocardial ischemia induced by rapid atrial pacing.  Fifteen patients with chest pain but normal coronary arteries and no coronary spasm served as controls.  The coronary sinus-arterial difference of fibrinopeptide A increased markedly (p less than 0.001) from 0.1 +/- 0.2 to 4.3 +/- 0.7 ng/ml after the anginal attacks in the coronary spastic angina group.  However, fibrinopeptide A levels remained unchanged after the attacks in the stable exertional angina group and after intracoronary injection of acetylcholine in the control group.  Plasma beta-thromboglobulin levels remained unchanged after the attacks in both patient groups and after acetylcholine in the control group.  Our data indicate that coronary spasm induces thrombin generation and may lead to thrombus formation in the coronary artery involved, but pacing-induced ischemia does not activate the coagulation system.
Increased endothelin in experimental heart failure.  Recent studies demonstrate that endothelin, a potent endogenous vasoconstrictor peptide, circulates in plasma of normal animals and humans.  However, the role of this peptide in pathophysiological states remains unclear.  The present study was designed to test the hypothesis that circulating endothelin concentrations are increased in experimental congestive heart failure (CHF), a pathophysiological state characterized by activation of vasoconstrictor mechanisms.  In anesthetized dogs with CHF produced by 8 days of rapid ventricular pacing (n = 28), circulating plasma endothelin was increased compared with values for normal controls (n = 28; 20.4 +/- 1.4 versus 9.7 +/- 0.9 pg/ml, respectively; p less than 0.0001).  A plasma endothelin level of more than 14.0 was a sensitive and specific indicator of significant CHF.  Moreover, within the group with experimental CHF, right atrial pressure and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure correlated independently with circulating endothelin levels.  Based on recent studies demonstrating the physiological actions of twofold increases in circulating endothelin, as observed in the present study, a possible role for endothelin in the pathophysiology of CHF is advanced.
Noncoordinate regulation of alpha-1 adrenoreceptor coupling and reexpression of alpha skeletal actin in myocardial infarction-induced left ventricular failure in rats.  To determine the effects of myocardial infarction-induced left ventricular failure on the regulation of surface alpha-1 adrenoreceptors and signal transduction, large infarcts were produced in rats and the animals killed seven days later.  After the documentation of impaired left ventricular pump performance, radioligand binding studies of the alpha-1 adrenoreceptor, norepinephrine-stimulated phosphoinositol turnover, and ADP ribosylation of 41 kD substrate by pertussis toxin were examined in the hypertrophying unaffected myocardium.  Moreover, the expression of sarcomeric actin isoforms was analyzed by Northern blots and hybridization with specific oligonucleotide probes.  Alpha-1 adrenoreceptor density was found not to be altered in membranes obtained from the spared left ventricular tissue, whereas phosphoinositol turnover was increased 3.1-fold in the viable myocytes of infarcted hearts.  Furthermore, pertussis toxin substrate was augmented 2.5-fold in membranes prepared from the surviving left ventricular myocardium.  Finally, an upregulation of the skeletal actin isoform was detected in the tissue of the failing left ventricle.  In conclusion, the possibility is raised that in the presence of severe myocardial dysfunction and ongoing reactive hypertrophy, effector pathways linked to the alpha-1 adrenoreceptor may stimulate the myocyte hypertrophic response which would tend to normalize cardiac hemodynamics.  The reexpression of alpha skeletal actin may be a molecular indicator of the persistance of an overload on the myocardium.
A mutation in the gene for type III procollagen (COL3A1) in a family with aortic aneurysms.  Experiments were carried out to test the hypothesis that familial aortic aneurysms, either thoracic or abdominal, are caused by mutations in the gene for type III procollagen (COL3A1) similar to mutations in the same gene that have been shown to cause rupture of aorta and other disastrous consequences in the rare genetic disorder known as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV.  A family was identified through a 37-yr-old female captain in the United States Air Force who was scrutinized only because many of her direct blood relatives had died of ruptured aortic aneurysms.  The woman was heterozygous for a single-base mutation that converted the codon for glycine 619 of the alpha 1(III) chain of type III procollagen to a codon for arginine.  Studies on cultured skin fibroblasts demonstrated the mutation caused synthesis of type III procollagen that had a decreased temperature for thermal unfolding of the protein.  The same mutation was identified in DNA extracted from pathologic specimens from her mother who had died at the age of 34 and a maternal aunt who died at the age of 55 of aortic aneurysms.  Examination of DNA from samples of saliva revealed that the woman's daughter, her son, a brother, and an aunt also had the mutation.  The results demonstrated that mutations in the type III procollagen gene can cause familial aortic aneurysms and that DNA tests for such mutations can identify individuals at risk for aneurysms.
Pathogenesis of hyperadrenergic orthostatic hypotension. Evidence of disordered venous innervation exclusively in the lower limbs.  The pathogenesis of hyperadrenergic orthostatic hypotension was studied in eight patients.  Correction of the abnormal orthostatic changes by an inflated pressure suit (MAST) confirmed previous evidence of excessive gravitational pooling of blood in the leg veins.  Intravenous L-norepinephrine infusion raised diastolic blood pressure in the same relationship to the infusion-induced increments in plasma norepinephrine concentrations as in normal subjects, indicating normal arteriolar responses.  Contractile responses of the veins to infused L-norepinephrine were measured with a linear variable differential transformer (LVDT).  The venous responses of hand veins in the patients fell within the 95% confidence limits of the responses of normal hand veins, as did the responses of foot veins in the seven normal subjects.  However, foot veins of the patients with hyperadrenergic orthostatic hypotension, and both hand and foot veins of patients with "diffuse" autonomic failure, were supersensitive to norepinephrine, as reflected by a steeper slope of the regression of log (norepinephrine infusion rate) on percentage reduction in venous distensibility, and a significantly lower ED50 (i.e., norepinephrine infusion rate that induced 50% reduction in venous distensibility).  The findings suggest anatomical or functional postganglionic denervation of lower limb veins causing excessive gravitational blood pooling with consequent orthostatic hypotension in these patients.
Both d-cis- and l-cis-diltiazem have anti-ischemic action in the isolated, perfused working rat heart.  The effect of diltiazem (d-cis-diltiazem) on the ischemic myocardium was compared with that of l-cis-diltiazem, an optical isomer having less potent calcium channel-blocking action, in the isolated, perfused working rat heart.  Ischemia decreased mechanical function and tissue levels of ATP and creatine phosphate, and increased tissue levels of nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA), AMP and lactate.  Reperfusion did not restore mechanical function, but restored incompletely the levels of metabolites (except NEFA) that had been altered by ischemia.  The ischemia-induced changes in NEFA were prevented by d-cis-diltiazem completely and by l-cis-diltiazem incompletely.  Other metabolic changes induced by ischemia were attenuated by d-cis-diltiazem but not by l-cis-diltiazem.  In heart pretreated with d-cis- or l-cis-diltiazem, both the mechanical function and the levels of metabolites recovered during reperfusion, the degree of recovery with both drugs being similar.  These results indicate that not only d-cis-diltiazem but also l-cis-diltiazem has an anti-ischemic action probably due to inhibition of the tissue NEFA accumulation.  These results also suggest that the mechanism of the protective effect of d-cis-diltiazem on the ischemic myocardium is not entirely due to the calcium channel-blocking action.  Treatment with low Ca2+ (1.0 mM CaCl2) also attenuated the ischemia-induced changes.  The interval between reoxygenation and start of function in the reperfused heart that had been treated with low Ca2+ was significantly longer than that with d-cis- or l-cis-diltiazem.  The effect of these isomers to shorten this interval may contribute to their common anti-ischemic action.
Carotid endarterectomy: a ten-year analysis of outcome and cost of treatment.  Between 1978 and 1988, 215 patients with an average age of 67 years, underwent 246 carotid endarterectomies.  Two hundred ten (85.4%) patients were symptomatic, and 36 (14.6%) were asymptomatic.  Six patients (2.4%) had a postoperative stroke, and all had immediate reoperation.  One of these patients died (30 day mortality rate, 0.4% for the series), and two (0.8%) recovered completely, whereas three (1.2%) had a mild permanent neurologic deficit.  Two patients (0.8%) had nonfatal myocardial infarction.  Mean follow-up of 42.2 months (range, 1 to 126 months) was achieved.  At 5 and 8 years actuarial survival rates of 82% and 66% and stroke-free survival rates of 67% and 37% were observed.  Actuarial stroke free rates of 90% at 5 and 8 years were noted.  By introducing and observing guidelines that required preoperative study of most clearly defined classes of patients before admission for surgical treatment, the average length of stay for carotid endarterectomy was lowered from 9.5 days in the first 5 years of the study to 5.8 days in the second 5 years (p = 0.001).  Average hospital charges, expressed in constant dollars, decreased from $3113 in the first 5 years to $2620 in the second 5 years (p = 0.02) despite an 88% inflationary increase in medical consumer price index.  This experience shows that the length of hospitalization of patients with carotid endarterectomy can be reduced and the cost of admission lowered without untoward effect on perioperative morbidity and mortality rates.
The value of pulmonary artery and central venous monitoring in patients undergoing abdominal aortic reconstructive surgery: a comparative study of two selected, randomized groups.  One hundred two patients undergoing abdominal aortic reconstructive surgery were prospectively, randomly allocated to two groups, one of which was monitored with a central venous catheter and the other with a pulmonary artery catheter.  Patients with uncompensated cardiopulmonary or renal disease were excluded from the study.  General anesthesia was administered for the surgical procedure, and the patients were followed through hospital discharge.  No statistically significant differences occurred between the two groups with regard to morbidity (perioperative cardiac, pulmonary or renal sequelae), mortality rate, duration of intensive care, postoperative hospital stay, or cost of hospitalization.  The one statistically significant difference between groups was the professional fee charged for anesthetic care, which was higher for patients with pulmonary artery catheters than for those with central venous catheters.  In conclusion, we prospectively gathered data from most patients presented for abdominal aortic reconstructive surgery.  Our data seem to indicate that the choice of central venous catheter or pulmonary artery catheter monitoring makes little difference in outcome after abdominal aortic reconstructive surgery, and that for many patients pulmonary artery catheters are not necessary to give appropriate, adequate care.  Because of the size of the sample, however, declarations of epidemiologic significance would be unfounded.  Therefore large-scale, multicenter studies addressing such outcomes remain necessary.
Relationship of atherosclerosis in young men to serum lipoprotein cholesterol concentrations and smoking. A preliminary report from the Pathobiological Determinants of Atherosclerosis in Youth (PDAY) Research Group   Investigators in eight communities collected aortas, right coronary arteries, blood, and associated information from 390 males, 15 to 34 years of age, who died of violent causes.  Pathologists at central laboratories graded the arteries for atherosclerotic lesions, and serum lipoprotein cholesterol and thiocyanate concentrations were measured.  The percentage of intimal surface involved with atherosclerotic lesions in both the aorta and the right coronary artery was positively associated with serum very low-density lipoprotein + low-density lipoprotein cholesterol concentration and negatively associated with serum high-density lipoprotein cholesterol concentration.  The serum thiocyanate concentration, a marker for smoking, was strongly associated with prevalence of raised lesions, particularly in the abdominal aorta.  The effect of smoking was not explained by lipoprotein levels.  Blacks had more extensive total surface involvement of the aorta after adjustment for lipoprotein cholesterol levels and smoking.  These associations indicate that serum lipoprotein cholesterol concentrations and smoking are important determinants of the early stages of atherosclerosis in adolescents and young adults.
The case against childhood cholesterol screening   Because some authorities have proposed blood cholesterol screening for children to prevent coronary heart disease, we reviewed published studies to estimate the potential risks and benefits of such screening.  Childhood cholesterol levels are a poor predictor of high cholesterol levels in young adulthood and will be an even poorer predictor of coronary heart disease later in life.  There is no evidence that blood cholesterol levels can be lowered more easily in children than in adults, and it seems unlikely that cholesterol reduction in childhood will be much more effective at preventing coronary heart disease than cholesterol reduction begun in middle age.  Screening and interventions to lower blood cholesterol levels for millions of children would be expensive, could lead to labeling and family conflicts, and may cause malnutrition and increased noncardiovascular mortality.  Because the benefits of cholesterol screening are unlikely to exceed these risks, we conclude that children should not be screened for high blood cholesterol levels.
Inferior vena caval filter thrombi: evaluation with intravascular US.  A 20-MHz intravascular ultrasound (US) transducer inside a percutaneously inserted catheter was used to evaluate inferior vena caval (IVC) filters for thrombi in vitro and in vivo.  Six different IVC filters were studied with intravascular US in a saline-filled model.  Each filter had a characteristic, recognizable US pattern.  Experimental thrombi as small as 0.5 cm3 were easily detected.  Intravascular US was used clinically 25 times to evaluate the IVC in 23 patients with 24 IVC filters.  Positive-contrast cavograms were available for comparison in all 25 cases.  In 13 cases, no thrombi were identified in the filter or IVC with either intravascular US or cavography; in five of 12 cases with thrombi, intravascular US and cavography demonstrated the thrombi equally well.  In six cases, intravascular US was superior to cavography in detection or delineation of thrombus in the IVC or filter.  Intravascular US was considered superior to external duplex US in evaluation of caval thrombi in all 21 cases available for comparison.  No complications from intravascular US were noted.
Iliac artery stenosis and occlusion: preliminary results of treatment with Gianturco expandable metallic stents.  Ten patients with atherosclerotic stenosis or occlusion of the iliac artery were treated with Gianturco expandable metallic stents.  In the five cases of stenosis, only balloon dilation was performed prior to placement of stents.  The five patients with occluded arteries were given intraarterial infusions of urokinase before balloon dilation and stent placement.  Clinical symptoms improved in all patients, and no technical failures or complications occurred.  Doppler ankle-brachial index studies were performed in nine cases, and in all nine cases the indexes improved after stent placement.  During follow-up of 2-18 months (mean, 10.3 months), all arteries remained patent.  Follow-up angiograms showed slight intimal thickening and no restenosis.  Long-term follow-up and more clinical experience will be necessary to evaluate the efficacy of this stent.  However, preliminary results suggest that the Gianturco expandable metallic stent is of value in the treatment of arterial occlusive disease.
The role of preoperative radionuclide ventriculography in defining outcome after revascularization of the extremity.  Revascularization of the extremity was performed upon 110 patients after preoperative radionuclide ventriculography (RNVG).  Mean ejection fraction (EF) was 50 +/- 13 per cent.  Ventricular wall motion abnormalities were present in 46 per cent.  Revascularization included inflow procedures, such as aortofemoral (n = 25) or extraanatomic bypass (axillofemoral or femorofemoral, n = 11); infrainguinal reconstruction, including femoropopliteal or distal bypass (n = 43), and other procedures to improve perfusion of the limb or correct complications after previous vascular reconstruction upon the extremity (n = 31).  Perioperative (30 days) mortality rate was 0.9 per cent and 97.0 per cent of the patients were discharged alive from the hospital.  Myocardial infarction (MI) occurred in 3.6 per cent, new ventricular arrhythmia in 1.8 per cent and congestive heart failure in 6.4 per cent of the patients during the perioperative period.  During follow-up study (607 +/- 363 days), 7.3 per cent required major amputation, ipsilateral to reconstruction, 5.5 per cent required surgical or angiographic revision for hemodynamic failure of the reconstruction prior to thrombosis and 12.7 per cent thrombosed part or all of the reconstruction.  Revascularization failure did not appear to be related to the level of cardiac function.  Those with normal (greater than 50 per cent) EF had greater over-all survival by life table analysis than those with EF less than or equal to 50 per cent (p = 0.0006, Mantel-Cox test).  Ventricular wall motion abnormalities were associated with reduced over-all survival (p = 0.008, Mantel-Cox test).  The presence of angina or previous MI, singularly or in combination, did not have an adverse effect on over-all survival, whereas diabetes (p = 0.0058, Mantel-Cox test) and cigarette smoking (p = 0.0137, Breslow test) were associated with significantly diminished over-all survival.  Preoperative RNVG can identify subgroups at a survival disadvantage after revascularization of the extremity in a population in which the presence of angina or previous MI does not predict survival.
Medical management of congestive heart failure.  The syndrome of congestive heart failure can result from a variety of cardiac disorders of which left ventricular dysfunction is the most common.  The clinical presentation is determined by the interaction between cardiac dysfunction and a series of compensatory mechanisms that are activated throughout the body.  Therapy for this disorder is best approached through an understanding of this complex relationship and an appreciation for the influence of preload, afterload, and contractility on cardiac performance.  Recent important advances in therapy include the use of combined diuretic therapy, a better understanding of the value of the digitalis glycosides, and evidence that angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors can relieve symptoms and prolong life.  More intensive therapy earlier in the course of congestive heart failure appears to have some clinical benefit.  The use of ACE inhibitors during this phase may delay progression of the underlying left ventricular dysfunction.  Future therapy will be influenced by the results of ongoing trials that are testing both new agents and expanded indications for drugs that are currently available.
Long-term prognosis of myocardial ischemia detected by Holter monitoring in peripheral vascular disease.  To assess the long-term prognostic significance of myocardial ischemia, as measured by ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring, in patients with occlusive peripheral arterial disease, 176 eligible patients scheduled for elective peripheral arterial surgery at Brigham and Women's Hospital were prospectively studied.  All patients were monitored preoperatively without alterations to baseline medications.  Prospective follow-up was obtained during routine medical care as provided by blinded, independent physicians and by subsequent telephone contact with the patients.  Thirty-two patients (18%) had a total of 75 episodes of myocardial ischemia, 73 (97%) of which were asymptomatic.  During a mean follow-up period of 615 days, there were 9 cardiac deaths, 1 occurring in-hospital after peripheral vascular surgery, and 13 nonfatal myocardial infarctions, 4 occurring in-hospital after peripheral vascular surgery.  Cardiac events occurred in 12 of 32 patients with ischemia (38%), including 6 cardiac deaths, and in 10 of 144 patients without ischemia (7%), including 3 cardiac deaths (risk ratio 5.4, 95% confidence interval 2.6 to 11.4).  The sensitivity of ischemia was 55%, the specificity was 87%, the positive predictive value was 38%, and the negative predictive value was 93%.  In a multivariate Cox proportional-hazards model controlling for age, gender, coronary risk factors, history of angina, myocardial infarction, coronary artery disease and antianginal medications, the presence of ischemia was the only independent predictor of outcome.  In patients with peripheral arterial disease, who often are unable to perform adequate exercise testing, ambulatory monitoring for myocardial ischemia is a significant independent predictor of 1- to 2-year prognosis.
Coronary artery disease in the octogenarian: angiographic spectrum and suitability for revascularization.  The angiographic findings of 84 consecutive octogenarians presenting with symptoms of coronary artery disease (CAD) were examined to determine the extent of CAD as well as suitability for both coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) and percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA).  The frequency of 0-, 1-, 2-, and 3-vessel and left main CAD was 7, 14, 21, 57 and 13%, respectively.  Based on angiographic criteria, 69 of 78 patients (88%) with significant CAD had suitable coronary anatomy for CABG.  Only 24 patients (31%) had coronary anatomy amenable to PTCA.  CABG was performed in 19 patients with an operative mortality of 16% and major complication rate of 37%.  PTCA was performed in 12 patients with a clinical success rate of 83%, mortality of 8% and major complication rate of 8%.  It is concluded that in octogenarians with CAD, cardiac catheterization will often reveal coronary anatomy that is suitable for CABG but less suitable for PTCA.  The morbidity and mortality associated with these interventions are high.
Changes in plasma free fatty acids and glycerols during prolonged exercise in trained and hypertensive persons taking propranolol and pindolol.  The extent to which lipolysis is attenuated during prolonged submaximal exercise during beta blockade was determined in 12 normotensive endurance-trained and 12 hypertensive sedentary men using nonselective drugs with and without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA).  Initially, subjects performed a graded treadmill test to determine maximal oxygen uptake (VO2max).  This was followed by 2-hour walks at 25 and 45% of the subject's VO2max under each of 3 treatments: pindolol (ISA), propranolol (non-ISA) and placebo.  The distribution of medication was randomized and double blinded.  Blood samples taken at rest and every 30 minutes during the 2-hour walks were analyzed to determine the concentrations of free fatty acids (FFA) and glycerol.  On the basis of the respective changes in FFA, glycerols and the respiratory exchange ratio, beta-adrenergic blockade did not attenuate lipolysis in the untrained hypertensive subjects when compared with the placebo administration.  However, beta blockade did demonstrate a tendency to attenuate lipolysis in the trained, normotensive subjects when compared with results after placebo administration.  This was particularly evident at 30 minutes of exercise, when both glycerol and FFA concentrations were not increased above resting values under both conditions of beta blockade.  No differences between pindolol and propranolol were observed.  Therefore, a beta-blocking agent with ISA properties appears to have no clear benefit with respect to lipid metabolism during low and moderate intensity exercise.  Furthermore, these data demonstrate that beta blockade does not inhibit exercise-induced lipolysis at low and moderate intensities of exercise as formerly believed, and is unlikely to be the cause of fatigue normally observed during work in patient populations taking beta-blocking medication.
Effects of renin inhibition in systemic hypertension.  The effect of the direct renin inhibitor enalkiren (Abbott Laboratories) was examined in 8 healthy patients with essential hypertension.  With an unrestricted sodium diet, plasma renin concentration was inhibited within 10 minutes by intravenous enalkiren and remained essentially undetectable for greater than or equal to 6 hours (11.9 +/- 4 to 1.0 +/- 0.6 ng angiotensin I/ml/hour, p less than 0.05).  Mean arterial blood pressure declined gradually (108 +/- 5 to 84 +/- 4 mm Hg, p = 0.02), as did plasma aldosterone concentration (14.4 +/- 3.8 to 4.4 +/- 0.8 ng/dl, p = 0.03), whereas plasma immunoreactive active renin concentration increased progressively (35 +/- 14 to 160 +/- 60 pg/ml, p greater than 0.05).  Urinary excretion of the stable metabolite of prostacyclin (6-keto-prostaglandin F1 alpha) decreased slightly, but not significantly (42 +/- 10 to 33 +/- 11 ng/g creatinine, p = 0.13).  The addition of a diuretic decreased baseline blood pressure and increased baseline plasma renin and aldosterone values.  Blood pressure responses to enalkiren were slightly (though not significantly) greater than those observed before diuretic administration.  We conclude that enalkiren is effective in decreasing blood pressure and in inhibiting the renin system, without significantly altering urinary prostacyclin excretion, in patients with essential hypertension.  These results suggest that the renin system contributes to the maintenance of elevated blood pressure in some patients with essential hypertension.
Circumferential quantitative analysis of planar 201T1 myocardial scintigraphy in the diagnosis of coronary artery disease.  Methodology for the computer analysis of 201T1 myocardial perfusion images has been developed by several laboratories.  Substantial evidence of the advantage of this approach over visual inspection alone has been reported.  The currently available computer analyses use different algorithms to analyze 201T1 kinetics in the myocardium.  The authors evaluated and compared two widely used software programs, Medical Data System (MDS): a mean-count profile, and the Cedars Sinai (CS): a maximal-count profile, of planar 201T1 scintigraphy for their ability to detect coronary artery disease (CAD).
B-mode imaging and histomorphometric evaluation of carotid atherosclerosis.  The quantitative and qualitative evaluation of atherosclerotic lesions by the ultrasonography has presented several problems, above all, the determination of accuracy and reproducibility of this methodology in humans.  The present study aims to evaluated the results of B-mode imaging of extracranial carotid arteries in patients selected for surgery as compared with histologic results of the observations of the samples obtained by endarterectomy.  Shrinkage effects of the histologic samples were taken into consideration.  Several bidimensional images of atherosclerotic lesions, as obtained by ultrasound at different incident angles, were used to establish their maximum thickness.  The maximum degree of the vessel stenosis calculated by ultrasound showed a high correlation (Y = 0.47X + 42.4, se = 0.11, r = 0.5, p less than 0.001) compared with the one obtained by histology.  The imaging methodology provided however, a mean overestimation of the stenosis of about 7%.  Relationships among the amount of calcium (p less than 0.03); necrotic core p less than 0.056); and echogenic types, ie, soft, mixed, and hard; have been suggested by a statistical trend.  The results suggested that of the vascular lumen due to advanced atherosclerotic lesions.  Qualitative interpretation of atherosclerosis by B-mode imaging, ie, morphologic characteristics, seem, at present, to be of value, but more investigations in depth are needed.
Doppler diagnostics, indications, and control of surgical treatment in patients with carotid pathology.  Major stroke is a relatively common cause of death or disabling invalidism in patients with atherosclerosis.  In a large percentage of cases it is caused by stenotic/thrombotic processes in carotid arteries and this emphasizes the importance of the problem of early diagnosis and treatment of carotid pathology.  Recently Doppler sonography has become a leading non-invasive method of early screening of stenotic processes in carotid arteries.  The aim of the present study was to ascertain the diagnostic abilities of Doppler sonography for screening of carotid pathology, assessment of extra-cranial and intracranial hemodynamics, defining of indications, and control of vascular reconstructions of carotids.
Bronchiolar morphology after systemic arterial interruption.  To assess ischemic lesions as a factor in obliterative bronchiolitis after lung transplantation, the authors severed the left bronchial arteries of 15 dogs, together with the left stem bronchus, the latter being immediately reanostomosed.  They examined the bronchioles at weekly interfals up to three and a half months.  On the week chosen each dog was anesthetized, totally heparinized, and exsanguino-perfused with saline.  Just after heart arrest, the thoracic aorta was injected with a barium solution until this white medium appeared in the bronchial arteries.  The heart-lung blocs were excised en bloc, submitted to soft-tissue x ray, fixed, and then sliced to 1 cm.  Corresponding right and left 5-mm-thick samples of these slices were prepared for contact microradiography followed by histologic 5-to-20-micron-thick, stained, correlated specimens.  For two weeks the left bronchial arteries remained empty, but there was no necrosis or edema.  Between two and four weeks barium solution appeared in the bronchial arteries, and the bronchiolar epithelium had become multistratified.  Later the left bronchiangiogram became similar to the right, but there were more folds of the mucosa and a little submucosal fibrosis.  These studies provide proof that no significant ischemic lesions occurred during repermeation of the bronchiolar vascular bed.  Ischemia, if existent, is not a significant factor in obliterative bronchiolitis.
Estrogen replacement and coronary artery disease. Effect on survival in postmenopausal women.  The relationship among postmenopausal estrogen use, coronary stenosis, and survival was examined retrospectively in 2268 women undergoing coronary angiography.  The patients were selected for study if their age was 55 years or older at the time of angiography or if they had previously undergone bilateral oophorectomy.  Postmenopausal estrogen use in 1178 patients with coronary artery disease (greater than 70% stenosis) and 644 patients with mild to moderate coronary artery disease (5% to 69% stenosis) was compared with 446 control subjects (0% stenosis) using life-table analysis.  Over 10 years of follow-up, there was no significant difference in survival among patients initially free of coronary lesions on arteriography who had either never used (377) or ever used (69) estrogens.  Among patients with mild to moderate coronary stenosis, 10-year survival of those who had never used estrogens was 85.0% and it was 95.6% among 99 "ever users." Survival was 60.0% among those with more than 70% coronary stenosis who had never used estrogen and it was 97.0% among 70 ever users.  The "never users" group were older (65 vs 59 years), had a lower proportion of cigarette smokers (40% vs 57.1%), a higher proportion of subjects with diabetes (21.7% vs 12.9%) and hyperlipidemia (58% vs 44%), and approximately equal numbers of hypertensives (56.0% vs 54.3%).  Cox's proportional hazards model was used to estimate survival as a function of multiple covariables.  Estrogen use was found to have a significant, independent effect on survival in women.  We conclude that estrogen replacement after menopause prolongs survival when coronary artery disease is present, but it has less effect in the absence of coronary artery disease.
Impact of a public cholesterol screening program.  The National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) has endorsed physician case finding as the primary method to detect individuals with elevated cholesterol levels.  Despite this recommendation, promotional and for-profit public screening programs have flourished.  We surveyed participants of a mall-based cholesterol screening program 1 year after their screening.  Sixty-four percent of those screened had not previously known their cholesterol levels.  Those who were newly screened were less likely to benefit from this testing than the general public, since they were older (mean age, 55.3 years), more likely to be female (67.4%), and nonsmokers (88%).  Screenees had excellent recall of their cholesterol level (mean absolute reporting error, 0.24 mmol/L [9 mg/dL]) and a good understanding of cholesterol as a coronary heart disease risk.  Those with elevated cholesterol levels reported high distress from screening but no reduction in overall psychosocial well-being and an actual decrease in absenteeism.  Only 53.7% of all who were advised to seek follow-up because of an elevated screening value had done so within the year following the screening program.  However, of those with values greater than 6.2 mmol/L (240 mg/dL), 68% had sought follow-up.  Many of those who participate in public screening programs have been previously tested, fall into low-benefit groups, or fail to comply with recommended follow-up.  We therefore conclude that cholesterol screening programs of the type now commonly offered are unlikely to contribute greatly to the national efforts to further reduce coronary heart disease.
Biplane transesophageal echocardiography: technique, image orientation, and preliminary experience in 131 patients.  Transesophageal echocardiography with use of a uniplane phased-array transducer with a transverse or horizontal scanning plane has become a well-established tool for evaluating cardiovascular diseases.  Recent introduction of biplane probes has enhanced the diagnostic capability of this imaging technique.  This article discusses the technique of biplane transesophageal echocardiographic examination and image orientation.  The diagnostic value and advantages of various biplane transesophageal images of the heart, aorta, and aortic arch from various esophageal positions are described.
Transesophageal echocardiography in the diagnosis of ostial left coronary artery stenosis.  The diagnosis of ostial stenosis of the left main coronary artery is usually made by use of coronary angiography.  However, positioning of the catheter across the obstruction may obscure this diagnosis during contrast injection.  Although a damping of arterial pressure when the catheter enters the left coronary artery may suggest ostial stenosis, it may not be possible to make this diagnosis with certainty during cardiac catheterization.  We report a series of four patients in whom the left coronary ostium and proximal left coronary arteries were visualized by means of transesophageal echocardiography.  Both ostial narrowing by plaque and abnormally fast flow velocities were seen.  In each case the echocardiographic findings contributed to the subsequent management of the patients.
Transesophageal echocardiography during percutaneous balloon mitral valvuloplasty.  To ascertain the value of transesophageal echocardiography during percutaneous balloon mitral valvuloplasty, the present study was undertaken in 26 anesthesized patients (21 women and 5 men; mean age, 47 years) with symptomatic rheumatic mitral valve stenosis.  In all but one patient the balloon dilation of the mitral valve was successful and Doppler-derived valve area increased (0.9 +/- 0.3 to 1.9 +/- 0.4 cm2).  Transesophageal echocardiography provides continuous monitoring, as well as guidance of the procedure.  Crossing the arterial septum, as well as delivery of the sheath through the mitral valve orifice and correct positioning of the balloon, was highly facilitated and reduced x-ray exposure time.  The degree of mitral regurgitation and the presence of interatrial shunting at the end of the procedure could be readily assessed, making cineangiography not necessary.  Complications of the procedure, such as pericardial effusion, could be detected before hemodynamic deterioration had occurred (one patient).  The advantages of transesophageal echocardiography for routine monitoring of percutaneous mitral valvuloplasty, however, should be weighted against the added risk and expense of this support.
Transesophageal echocardiography in the diagnosis of left atrial appendage aneurysm.  Intrapericardial left atrial appendage aneurysm is rare.  We describe the transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiographic findings in a 42-year-old man with atrial arrhythmia and an abnormal left atrial appendage on chest roentgenogram.  Presence of an intrapericardial left atrial appendage aneurysm was confirmed at surgery.
Evidence of hibernating myocardium by a new transesophageal echocardiographic technique.  Reversal of resting wall motion abnormalities after successful coronary angioplasty were documented in a patient with the use of a novel approach to stress testing.  Transesophageal stress echocardiography utilizes transesophageal atrial pacing to provoke myocardial ischemia while the left ventricular contractility is being monitored by means of transesophageal echocardiography.  The potential use of this technique is illustrated in this report.
Prevalence of coronary heart disease in Scotland: Scottish Heart Health Study   Data from 10,359 men and women aged 40-59 years from 22 districts in the Scottish Heart Health Study were used to describe the prevalence rates of coronary heart disease in Scotland in 1984-1986 and their relation to the geographical variation in mortality in these districts.  Prevalence was measured by previous history, Rose chest pain questionnaire, and the Minnesota code of a 12 lead resting electrocardiogram.  The prevalence of coronary heart disease in Scotland was high compared with studies from other countries that used the same standardised methods.  A history of angina was more common in men (5.5%) than in women (3.9%), though in response to the Rose questionnaire 8.5% of women and 6.3% of men reported chest pain.  A history of myocardial infarction was three times more common in men than women, as was a Q/QS pattern on the electrocardiogram.  There were significant correlations between the different measures of coronary prevalence.  District measures of angina correlated well with mortality from coronary heart disease, and these correlations tended to be stronger in women than in men.  There was no significant correlation between mortality from coronary heart disease and measures of myocardial infarction.  The study provides data on the prevalence of coronary heart disease in men and women that are valuable for the planning of cardiological services.
Transient myocardial ischaemia after acute myocardial infarction.  The prevalence and characteristics of transient myocardial ischaemia were studied in 203 patients with recent acute myocardial infarction by both early (6.4 days) and late (38 days) ambulatory monitoring of the ST segment.  Transient ST segment depression was much commoner during late (32% patients) than early (14%) monitoring.  Most transient ischaemia (greater than 85% episodes) was silent and 80% of patients had only silent episodes.  During late monitoring painful ST depression was accompanied by greater ST depression and tended to occur at a higher heart rate.  Late transient ischaemia showed a diurnal distribution, occurred at a higher initial heart rate, and was more often accompanied by a further increase in heart rate than early ischaemia.  Thus in the first 2 months after myocardial infarction transient ischaemia became increasingly common and more closely associated with increased myocardial oxygen demand.  Because transient ischaemic episodes during early and late ambulatory monitoring have dissimilar characteristics they may also have different pathophysiologies and prognostic implications.
Relation between intraventricular pressure and volume in diastole.  The pressure-volume curves for 10 patients with various types of heart disease were studied throughout mid to late diastole when both pressure and volume were increasing.  The results were used to test a currently held theory that the form of this relation is exponential.  It was found that for the patients examined this hypothesis was not valid.
Operative findings after percutaneous pulmonary balloon dilatation of the right ventricular outflow tract in tetralogy of Fallot.  Since 1983 percutaneous balloon dilatation of the right ventricular outflow tract has been performed as an alternative to surgical palliation in selected cases of tetralogy of Fallot at the Royal Liverpool Children's Hospital.  From 31 December 1984 to 31 December 1988, 27 of these patients underwent subsequent surgical correction.  Age at operation ranged from 7 to 58 months (median 2.7 years).  The mean interval between balloon dilatation and correction was 15.6 months (range 3-39 months).  Two patients had a systemic pulmonary shunt operation performed before dilatation and a further five required one afterwards.  Overall 20 (74%) patients had some anatomical alteration as the result of balloon dilatation, while in seven (26%) there was no discernible change in the right ventricular outflow tract.  There was no consistent relation between the ratio of balloon size to pulmonary annulus diameter and the morphological findings.  Balloon dilatation may obviate the need for systemic-pulmonary shunt at the expense of some structural damage, particularly to the posterior cusp.  The present data suggest that dilatation does not bring about growth of the annulus to such an extent that transannular patch is no longer needed at intracardiac repair.
Diagnostic echocardiographic features of the sinus venosus defect.  To establish the diagnostic criteria for a sinus venosus atrial septal defect cross sectional echocardiograms, cineangiograms, and surgical notes of all patients with this diagnosis seen at the Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh between 1986 and 1988 were reviewed.  Seven patients were identified.  In each the extent of the atrial septum and the nature of the junction of the superior vena cava with the atria were evaluated echocardiographically from the subcostal position.  All had overriding of the superior vena cava and abnormally connected right pulmonary veins.  Six patients had undergone cardiac catheterisation and cineangiography.  Five patients underwent surgical repair.  The operative findings were consistent with the expected morphology in all five, and these features were additionally confirmed in a specimen from the cardiopathological museum.  Therefore, the basic anatomical feature of a superior sinus venosus interatrial communication is a biatrial connection of the superior vena cava.  This, together with anomalous drainage of the right sided pulmonary veins, results in an interatrial communication outside the confines of the true atrial septum.  Overriding of the superior vena cava across the upper rim of the oval fossa is suggested as the pathognomonic diagnostic feature that can clearly be demonstrated echocardiographically from the subcostal position.  In essence the lesion is an interatrial communication rather than an atrial septal defect.
Coarctation of the aorta and post-stenotic aneurysm formation.  Despite earlier angiography, post-stenotic aneurysm of the aorta was an unexpected finding at operation in two patients with coarctation.  One aneurysm was found in an intercostal artery in a 19 year old man and the other was a false aneurysm just distal to the coarctation site in a 7 year old boy.  These aneurysms are fragile, apt to rupture, and difficult to diagnose preoperatively.  Though local factors such as jet streams and bacterial endocarditis may influence their formation there must be an underlying generalised weakness in the arterial wall.  A coarctation should not be regarded as an isolated arterial abnormality because it may be a feature of a more generalised disease.  Because of the risk of rupture, which may not be prevented by antihypertensive treatment, operation should not be delayed in any age group.
Balloon dilatation of the mitral valve by a single bifoil (2 x 19 mm) or trefoil (3 x 15 mm) catheter.  The efficacy of balloon dilatation of the mitral valve by a bifoil (2 x 19 mm) or trefoil (3 x 15 mm) catheter (single catheter technique) was assessed in 53 patients (mean age 28) with mitral stenosis, most of whom were women.  The procedure was unsuccessful in three patients.  After balloon dilatation the left atrial pressure decreased from 22 mm Hg to 13 mm Hg and the mitral valve gradient from 12 mm Hg to 4 mm Hg.  The mitral valve area increased from 0.7 cm2 to 2.1 cm2.  Exercise time on the standard Bruce protocol increased from 3.9 minutes to 7.2 minutes.  In 22 (44%) patients mitral regurgitation developed or the grade of regurgitation increased.  Left to right shunts with pulmonary to systemic flow ratios greater than 1:5 were detected in four patients.  Transient cerebrovascular episodes developed in two patients.  One patient died after emergency valve replacement for severe mitral regurgitation.  Balloon dilatation of the mitral valve by the single catheter technique with the bifoil or trefoil catheters is an effective treatment for patients with mitral stenosis.  Mild mitral regurgitation is a frequent complication of the procedure.
Interleukin-2-induced lung permeability is mediated by leukotriene B4.  Interleukin (IL)-2 therapy leads to respiratory dysfunction due to increased vascular permeability.  This study examines the role of the chemoattractant, immunomodulator, and permeability-promoting agent leukotriene (LT) B4 in this setting.  Sheep with chronic lung lymph fistulae were given IL-2, 10(5) U/kg as an IV bolus (n = 6).  Within 2 hours this led to a significant increase in LTB4 levels in both plasma and lung lymph.  The mean pulmonary artery pressure (MPAP) rose while the pulmonary artery wedge pressure was unchanged.  Arterial oxygen tension (PaO2) fell.  Lung lymph flow (QL) was tripled (P less than 0.05) at 3 hours, coinciding with an increase in the lymph/plasma (L/P) protein ratio (P less than 0.05) resulting in an increase in the lymph protein clearance (P less than 0.05), data documenting increased microvascular permeability to protein.  Mild leukopenia and thrombocytopenia (P less than 0.05) occurred.  Body temperature rose and shaking chills were common.  Pretreatment with the lipoxygenase inhibitor diethylcarbamazine (DEC; n = 6) reduced baseline plasma LTB4 levels and prevented the IL-2-induced increases in LTB4 in plasma and lung lymph (P less than 0.05).  In contrast to IL-2 treatment alone, DEC blunted the increase in MPAP and prevented the rises in QL (P less than 0.05), L/P protein ratio (P less than 0.05), and lymph protein clearance (P less than 0.05).  DEC also prevented the IL-2-induced leukopenia, the fall in platelet count, and the rise in body temperature (P less than 0.05, respectively).  Infusion of IL-2 excipient control (n = 5) did not affect plasma or lymph LTB4 levels but there were mild increases in MPAP (P less than 0.05).  The QL also rose but this occurred while the L/P protein ratio fell (P less than 0.05).  Body temperature rose moderately.  The PaO2, leukocyte, and platelet counts were unaffected.  These data indicate that IL-2 administration leads to pulmonary dysfunction manifest by pulmonary hypertension and increased vascular permeability, events associated with LTB4 synthesis and prevented by DEC.  Leukotriene B4 appears therefore to mediate the IL-2-induced lung injury.
Baroreflex control of renal sympathetic nerve activity is potentiated at early phase of two-kidney, one-clip Goldblatt hypertension in conscious rabbits.  Conscious normotensive and two-kidney, one-clip Goldblatt hypertensive rabbits were studied to determine the sensitivity of the arterial baroreflex control of renal sympathetic nerve activity (RSNA) and heart rate.  The relations of the mean arterial pressure-RSNA and mean arterial pressure-heart rate were examined over a wide range of blood pressures produced by infusions of phenylephrine and nitroglycerin.  The maximum slope obtained by logistic function analysis was considered to represent the baroreflex sensitivity.  In the early hypertensive group (n = 8; mean arterial pressure +/- SEM, 88 +/- 2 mm Hg) on day 5 after renal clip application, the maximum slope of the mean arterial pressure-RSNA relation was -11.3 +/- 1.2, which was significantly greater than that of the sham normotensive group (-6.9 +/- 0.3, p less than 0.05).  The maximum slope (-4.3 +/- 0.2) of the mean arterial pressure-RSNA relation in the late hypertensive group (n = 8; mean arterial pressure, 96 +/- 3 mm Hg) on day 21 after renal clipping was significantly smaller than that of another sham group (-7.2 +/- 0.2, p less than 0.05).  In contrast to these changes in the baroreflex control of RSNA, the control of heart rate was attenuated according to the magnitude of mean arterial pressure.  To elucidate the mechanisms underlying the potentiated baroreflex, the effects of endogenous neuropeptides were investigated.  First, plasma concentrations of angiotensin II and arginine vasopressin that are known to affect the baroreflex were determined.  Plasma concentrations of vasopressin (3.1 +/- 0.6 pg/ml) as well as of angiotensin II (34 +/- 7 pg/ml) were increased in the early hypertensive group, and the plasma vasopressin returned to a similar level to the sham group in the late hypertensive group (1.3 +/- 0.4 pg/ml).  Second, to study endogenous effects of these neuropeptides on the baroreflex, the maximum slopes of the baroreflex curves during infusions of antagonists for the peptides were determined in the early hypertensive group.  The maximum slope of mean arterial pressure-RSNA during intravertebral arterial [Sar1, Ala8]-angiotensin II (-16.4 +/- 1.5) was significantly greater (p less than 0.05), whereas the maximum slope during intravertebral arterial infusion of d(CH2)5Tyr(Me)arginine vasopressin (-4.7 +/- 0.5) was significantly smaller (p less than 0.05) than that during vehicle infusion (-11.3 +/- 1.2).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS).
Chronic calcium channel blockade prevents the progression of myocardial contractile and electrical dysfunction in the cardiomyopathic Syrian hamster.  The programmed onset of myocardial dysfunction and its progression to congestive heart failure in the cardiomyopathic Syrian hamster is hallmarked by alterations in myocellular calcium regulation.  To determine whether calcium channel blockade is effective in halting the progressive depression of myocardial contractile performance in this animal model of congestive heart failure, oral verapamil therapy was instituted at 50 days of age, and treatment continued for various durations until the time of study at either 150 or 250 days of age.  Left ventricular papillary muscle isometric and isotonic performance, as well as transmembrane electrical characteristics, was depressed in diseased hamsters at 150 days of age and deteriorated further by 250 days of age.  These changes were evidenced by prolongation of contraction duration, a marked depression in the load-velocity relation, and a significant prolongation in the repolarization phase of the transmembrane action potential.  Myocardial functional and electrical alterations associated with the progression of life in myopathic hamsters were completely halted by verapamil therapy that was continuous from 50 days after birth until death by diastolic arrest, at 150 or 250 days of age.  However, premature termination of verapamil treatment before death resulted in a progressive renewal of the functional and electrical alterations for the duration of drug termination.  It is concluded that the pathological changes seen during the lifetime of the cardiomyopathic hamster can be prevented by continuous calcium channel blockade and that intermediate prevention can be attained by protracted verapamil therapy.  Thus, chronic verapamil therapy may be a useful adjunct in the prevention of human congestive heart failure of similar etiology.
Enhanced chemiluminescence as a measure of oxygen-derived free radical generation during ischemia and reperfusion.  It has been suggested that oxygen-derived free radicals may contribute to the myocardial injury associated with ischemia and reperfusion.  As the presence of enhanced free radical generation is a prerequisite for such damage, several techniques have been used to provide evidence of increased oxygen free radical production during reperfusion; however, all such techniques have substantial limitations.  In this study, we used enhanced chemiluminescence to evaluate oxygen free radical generation during ischemia and reperfusion in the isolated Langendorff-perfused rat heart.  The chemiluminescent technique, which has high sensitivity and can monitor radical generation continuously, avoids some of the limitations of earlier methods.  Chemiluminescence (expressed as counts per second) decreased from 219 +/- 11 at baseline to 142 +/- 9 during ischemia and markedly increased to a peak of 476 +/- 36 during the first 3-5 minutes of reperfusion.  This was followed by a slow decline over 11-16 minutes to a steady-state level of 253 +/- 14 (each sequential change in chemiluminescence was highly significant; p less than 0.001).  Superoxide dismutase (2,000 units/min) significantly decreased peak reperfusion chemiluminescence to 316 +/- 17 (p less than 0.01).  Hearts subjected to a second period of ischemia and reperfusion had a higher peak chemiluminescence (626 +/- 62), which also was significantly attenuated by 1,000 units/min superoxide dismutase (398 +/- 16; p less than 0.01).
Collagen phenotypes during development and regression of myocardial hypertrophy in spontaneously hypertensive rats.  The myocardium contains collagen matrix that is a major determinant of its architecture, structural integrity, and mechanical properties.  This fibrillar matrix consists primarily of type I and type III collagens having epimysial, perimysial, and endomysial components.  The present study shows the alteration of collagen phenotypes during the evolution of hypertensive hypertrophy.  Therapy with captopril, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor that regresses cardiac hypertrophy, not only reduces the total amount of collagen but reverses the altered distribution of type I and type III collagen.  In normotensive rats, captopril did not significantly reduce collagen content or alter the ratio of type I to type III collagen.
Regeneration of myocardial phosphocreatine in pigs despite continued moderate ischemia.  The effects of 1 hour of mild and moderate reductions in coronary blood flow on myocardial high-energy phosphate levels were evaluated.  Thirty anesthetized pigs were instrumented with left anterior descending arterial and venous catheters, crystals for instantaneous wall thickness, and a fluid-filled occluder.  Measurement of myocardial blood flow was performed with microspheres, and a series of myocardial biopsies also was performed.  In 10 pigs, overall coronary blood flow was lowered by 22%, with a fall in subendocardial-to-subepicardial flow ratio from 1.11 to 0.54 and in wall thickening from 33% to 15%.  Subendocardial flow fell 48%.  Coronary blood flow and thickening were constant during 1 hour of ischemia.  Phosphocreatine (mumol/g wet wt) in the subendocardial third of the ischemic zone fell from 7.6 to 3.8 at 5 minutes of ischemia (p less than 0.005 versus control) and returned to normal (7.9) at 60 minutes (p = NS), despite ongoing ischemia.  Subendocardial ATP (mumol/g wet wt) fell slowly from 4.3 and leveled off at 2.1 at 60 minutes of ischemia (p less than 0.001 versus control).  Similar regeneration of phosphocreatine was found in seven additional pigs, with a 43% transmural reduction in coronary blood flow and a 66% reduction in subendocardial flow.  No significant changes in ATP and phosphocreatine were noted in two different control groups (n = 13 pigs).  The regeneration of phosphocreatine despite ongoing ischemia and low ATP levels was not related to changes in myocardial oxygen demand or consumption, or in regional function during the period of ischemia.  This may reflect 1) a successful downregulation of the energy needs of the ischemic myocardium to maintain cell viability, or 2) a metabolic abnormality in the ability of the cells to produce ATP primarily or by use of phosphocreatine.
Use of pulmonary artery catheters in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Analysis of experience in 5,841 patients in the SPRINT Registry. SPRINT Study Group   This study analyzes the use of PAC in a registry comprising 5,841 hospitalized patients with AMI.  A total of 371 patients received PAC.  In-hospital mortality was higher in patients with CHF who received PAC, while there was no difference in patients with cardiogenic shock or persistent hypotension.  Mortality in patients receiving PAC was higher irrespective of the presence or absence of "pump failure." A separate analysis of discharge summaries of 364 patients with CHF showed that PAC was used more frequently in sicker patients and that when severity of CHF was assessed, no difference in mortality was found in patients with mild or moderate CHF.  We conclude that while a higher in-hospital mortality is found in patients receiving PAC, this excess is likely related to difference in severity of CHF, which had not been assessed in every individual.  It is unlikely that PAC increases mortality.
Clinical antecedents to in-hospital cardiopulmonary arrest.  While the outcome of in-hospital cardiopulmonary arrest has been studied extensively, the clinical antecedents of arrest are less well defined.  We studied a group of consecutive general hospital ward patients developing cardiopulmonary arrest.  Prospectively determined definitions of underlying pathophysiology, severity of underlying disease, patient complaints, and clinical observations were used to determine common clinical features.  Sixty-four patients arrested 161 +/- 26 hours following hospital admission.  Pathophysiologic alterations preceding arrest were classified as respiratory in 24 patients (38 percent), metabolic in 7 (11 percent), cardiac in 6 (9 percent), neurologic in 4 (6 percent), multiple in 17 (27 percent), and unclassified in 6 (9 percent).  Patients with multiple disturbances had mainly respiratory (39 percent) and metabolic (44 percent) disorders.  Fifty-four patients (84 percent) had documented observations of clinical deterioration or new complaints within eight hours of arrest.  Seventy percent of all patients had either deterioration of respiratory or mental function observed during this time.  Routine laboratory tests obtained before arrest showed no consistent abnormalities, but vital signs showed a mean respiratory rate of 29 +/- 1 breaths per minute.  The prognoses of patients' underlying diseases were classified as ultimately fatal in 26 (41 percent), nonfatal in 23 (36 percent), and rapidly fatal in 15 (23 percent).  Five patients (8 percent) survived to hospital discharge.  Patients developing arrest on the general hospital ward services have predominantly respiratory and metabolic derangements immediately preceding their arrests.  Their underlying diseases are generally not rapidly fatal.  Arrest is frequently preceded by a clinical deterioration involving either respiratory or mental function.  These features and the high mortality associated with arrest suggest that efforts to predict and prevent arrest might prove beneficial.
Should family doctors screen asymptomatic children for high blood pressure?  Whereas the United States Task Forces on Blood Pressure Control in Children have recommended annual blood pressure screening in all children, a working party of the British Hypertension Society has formed the opposite opinion.  Relevant literature is reviewed here, and the conclusion reached that on epidemiological and ethical grounds, screening children for hypertension cannot at present be justified.
Brief angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor treatment in young spontaneously hypertensive rats reduces blood pressure long-term   Our study examines the long-term cardiovascular effects after a brief period of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor treatment in young spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR).  SHR were treated with perindopril (3 mg/kg/day) by gavage from 2 to 6, from 6 to 10, or from 2 to 10 weeks of age.  Systolic blood pressure was measured in the tail weekly until 25 weeks of age.  Corresponding control groups received distilled water for the same periods.  In each treatment group blood pressure was reduced significantly during treatment, rose when treatment stopped, but plateaued significantly below control SHR thereafter.  This difference in blood pressure at 25 weeks of age was due to reduced total peripheral resistance as determined by microsphere methods, but plasma renin activity and angiotensin II concentrations were not different.  Cardiac hypertrophy was also reduced in treated SHR.  In a separate experiment, perindopril treatment from 6 to 10 weeks of age resulted in a significant reduction in the media/lumen ratios of mesenteric resistance vessels at 32 weeks of age.  Concomitant administration of angiotensin II with perindopril from 6 to 10 weeks of age not only prevented the long-term effects on blood pressure seen with perindopril treatment alone but was associated with cardiovascular hypertrophy in excess of untreated control SHR.  Finally, perindopril given for a shorter period (6 to 7 weeks) or later in life (20 to 24 weeks) had no significant long-term effects on blood pressure.  These results demonstrate that a 4-week period of ACE inhibitor treatment in young SHR is sufficient to prevent the full expression of genetic hypertension and cardiovascular hypertrophy and that angiotensin II might be important in the development of hypertension in this model, its role in later life being less important.
"White coat" versus "sustained" borderline hypertension in Tecumseh, Michigan   During a survey of young subjects not receiving treatment for hypertension in Tecumseh, Michigan, clinic and self-monitored blood pressures taken at home (14 readings in 7 days) were obtained in 737 subjects (387 men, 350 women, average age 31.5 years).  Hypertension in the clinic was diagnosed if the clinic blood pressure exceeded 140 mm Hg systolic or 90 mm Hg diastolic.  In the absence of firm criteria for what constitutes hypertension at home, subjects whose average home blood pressure was in the upper decile of the whole population were considered to have hypertension at home.  By these criteria, 7.1% of the whole population had "white coat" hypertension (i.e., high clinic but not elevated home readings).  The prevalence of "sustained" hypertension (i.e., high readings in the clinic and at home) was 5.1%.  Subjects with white coat and sustained borderline hypertension in Tecumseh were very similar.  Both groups showed, at previous examinations (at ages 5, 8, 21, and 23 years), significantly higher blood pressure readings than the normotensive subjects.  As young adults (average age 33.3 years), the parents of both hypertensive groups had significantly higher blood pressure readings than the parents of normotensive subjects.  Both hypertensive groups had faster heart rates, higher systemic vascular resistance, and higher minimal forearm vascular resistance.  Both hypertensive groups were more overweight, had higher plasma triglycerides, insulin, and insulin/glucose ratios than normotensive subjects.  The white coat hypertensive group also had lower values of high density lipoprotein than the normotensive group.  White coat hypertension is a frequent condition.
Thromboxane A2 and development of genetic hypertension in the Lyon rat strain.  To determine whether the increased renal biosynthesis of thromboxane A2 observed in young genetically hypertensive rats of the Lyon strain could be involved in the development of their hypertension, Lyon hypertensive female rats received either thromboxane synthetase inhibitors (Dazmegrel or OKY 046) or a thromboxane A2 receptor antagonist (AH 23848) during their prehypertensive stage.  Treatment from 5 to 9 weeks of age with Dazmegrel failed to reduce systolic blood pressure.  When given from 3 to 9 weeks of age, Dazmegrel and OKY 046 induced a similar progressive and specific reduction (60%) in the urinary excretion of thromboxane B2 that was associated with a transient decrease in blood pressure level with Dazmegrel and a longer lasting blood pressure-lowering effect with OKY 046.  AH 23848, given according to the same schedule, normalized the blood pressure level.  This effect persisted 1 week after the cessation of the treatment.  Interestingly, active doses of thromboxane synthetase inhibitors or of thromboxane A2 receptor blocker required a 3-week delay to exhibit their antihypertensive properties.  It is concluded that 1) the elevated production of thromboxane A2 observed in young Lyon hypertensive rats is likely to participate actively in their blood pressure regulation and 2) this effect may be independent of its direct vasoconstrictor properties.
Role of endothelium in the response to endothelin in hypertension.  The relation between endothelin and acetylcholine (ACh) was examined and compared in aortas from Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats and from stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRSP).  The relaxation produced by ACh in an endothelin-induced contraction was less in aortas from WKY rats than in those from SHRSP.  In aortas from WKY rats but not in those from SHRSP, the contraction produced by endothelin was augmented when the intact aortic rings were treated with methylene blue (10(-5) M).  This augmentation was also found in preparations of the WKY rat aortic rings in which the endothelium had been removed.  The augmentation was not present in SHRSP aortic rings that had been similarly denuded.  Treatment with indomethacin (5 x 10(-6) M) had no effect on endothelin-induced contraction in either WKY rat or SHRSP aortic rings.  Our findings indicate that endothelin and ACh have in common the ability to release endothelium-derived relaxing factor (EDRF) in WKY rat aortic rings.  The reduced endothelium-dependent relaxation in response to ACh in the WKY rat probably reflects the fact that endothelin had already released the EDRF in rings from this strain of rats.  The release of EDRF by endothelin is less in SHRSP than it is in WKY rats.  Because of this failure of endothelin to release EDRF in SHRSP, endothelin may contribute to the increase in total peripheral resistance in this form of hypertension.
Fish oil amplifies the effect of propranolol in mild essential hypertension.  Forty-seven male patients with mild essential hypertension were randomly allocated to three subgroups.  After a run-in period of 4 weeks, the first subgroup (n = 16) received propranolol (80 mg/day) for 36 weeks followed by a placebo period of 4 weeks.  The second subgroup (n = 15), after a run-in period of 4 weeks, was given a supplement of encapsulated fish oil (9 g/day) for 36 weeks with a subsequent period of 4 weeks in which fish oil placebo was given.  The third subgroup (n = 16), after a run-in period of 4 weeks, was given propranolol (80 mg/day) for 12 weeks, propranolol (80 mg/day) plus fish oil capsules (9 g/day equivalent to 1.8 g/day of eicosapentaenoic acid and 1.1 g/day of docosahexaenoic acid) for 12 weeks, propranolol plus fish oil placebo (same doses for 12 weeks) with a subsequent period of 4 weeks when propranolol placebo was administered.  The results indicate a blood pressure-lowering effect of fish oil, which was comparable with that of propranolol.  The simultaneous intake of fish oil plus propranolol was more effective than propranolol or fish oil alone.  Propranolol treatment resulted in a decrease of plasma norepinephrine, plasma renin activity, and thromboxane B2 formation.  After fish oil supplementation, plasma norepinephrine and thromboxane B2 formation were likewise reduced, whereas plasma renin activity appeared increased.  The decrease of serum triglycerides, total and low density lipoprotein cholesterol as well as the rise of high density lipoprotein cholesterol are concomitant beneficial effects, which justify the consideration of fish oil alone or in combination with antihypertensive drugs for the treatment of mild hypertension.
Insulin resistance and blood pressure in young black men.  Insulin resistance, independent of obesity or non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, has been demonstrated to be associated with high blood pressure.  To determine if insulin resistance could be an antecedent to hypertension in a high-risk population, we studied normotensive (112 +/- 12/70 +/- 10 mm Hg) and borderline hypertensive (135 +/- 8/85 +/- 5 mm Hg) lean young black men (22-26 years old) with the euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp technique.  All subjects had clinically normal oral glucose tolerance.  Body mass index and percent adipose mass were the same in both groups.  Fasting plasma insulin concentration was significantly higher in the borderline hypertensive group (p less than 0.01).  Insulin-directed exogenous glucose metabolism at the same degree of steady-state hyperinsulinemia was significantly lower in the borderline hypertensive group (5.98 +/- 2.22 versus 8.22 +/- 1.96 mg/kg/min; p less than 0.01).  For the total population, a significant inverse correlation existed between the glucose infusion rate and systolic blood pressure (p less than 0.01).  These data indicate that there is a relation between insulin-mediated glucose uptake and blood pressure.  Furthermore, in this high-risk population insulin resistance may precede the onset of established essential hypertension.
Similar frequencies of renin gene restriction fragment length polymorphisms in hypertensive and normotensive subjects.  A prospective study was conducted to compare the frequency of renin gene polymorphisms in normotensive and hypertensive subjects.  Hypertensive (n = 102, blood pressure 168 +/- 17/103 +/- 9 mm Hg) and normotensive (n = 120, blood pressure 122 +/- 10/75 +/- 9 mm Hg) subjects were white, had similar age and sex distributions (hypertensive group, 45 +/- 10 years old and 52% female; normotensive group, 44 +/- 9 years old and 55% female) and similar body mass index (hypertensive group, 23.2 +/- 2.6; normotensive group, 22.5 +/- 2.4 kg/m2, p = 0.048).  The familial susceptibility to hypertension was defined as at least one parent and one sibling who were hypertensive before age 65; subjects in the normotensive group had no familial history of hypertension.  Renin gene polymorphisms located throughout the renin gene were identified by using three restriction enzymes (Taq I, HinfI, HindIII).  For each polymorphic restriction site, allele frequencies were similar in the hypertensive and the normotensive groups.  In the absence of parental genotypes, the haplotype frequencies combining the three restriction fragment length polymorphisms were estimated by using maximum likelihood techniques and were similar in both groups (hypertensive group, 0.429, 0.277, and 0.177; normotensive group, 0.453, 0.245, and 0.195 for the three most common haplotypes).  A rare haplotype detected by Taq I/Hind III was apparently more frequent in the hypertensive than in the normotensive group (hypertensive group, tH 0.086, th 0.022; normotensive group, tH 0.038, th 0.050), but the difference was not statistically significant.  In conclusion, no association between renin gene polymorphisms and essential hypertension was demonstrated in the present study.
The surprising kidney-fluid mechanism for pressure control--its infinite gain!  In this short paper, I have tried to explain the elation that we felt when we first realized that the kidney-fluid mechanism for controlling the arterial pressure has an infinite feedback gain property.  Because of this, all the other pressure control mechanisms, none of which has ever been shown to have a similar infinite gain property, must themselves alter the kidney-fluid mechanism if they are to succeed in causing long-term changes in the arterial pressure.  We have not been able to refute this principle despite many experiments over the last 2 decades.  For this reason, our first understanding of the infinite gain property of the kidney-fluid mechanism was like a light at the end of the tunnel.  I hope that I can explain to the reader the excitement of those few seconds when we first recognized the principle in 1966.
Vascular flow capacity of hindlimb skeletal muscles in spontaneously hypertensive rats.  Total and regional skeletal muscle flows (radiolabeled microspheres) were determined in isolated maximally vasodilated hindquarters of spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and age-matched (11-12 mo) normotensive Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY) to assess the vascular flow capacity of the skeletal muscle vascular beds.  Vascular flow capacity was estimated by measuring total hindquarters and regional muscle blood flows (under conditions of maximal vasodilation with papaverine or papaverine plus isoproterenol) over a wide range of perfusion pressures in WKY and SHR.  Capillary exchange capacity was estimated by determining the capillary filtration coefficient.  Isogravimetric capillary pressures and segmental vascular resistances were determined in each hindquarter.  Isogravimetric flows and capillary pressures were not different between WKY and SHR.  However, total and precapillary vascular resistances were significantly elevated in SHR, and postcapillary resistances were not different compared with WKY.  Maximal capillary filtration coefficient values for the SHR group averaged 20% lower than WKY values, suggesting that hypertension was associated with a reduction in the microvascular surface area available for fluid exchange and, therefore, the capillary exchange capacity.  Over the perfusion pressures studied, total hindquarters flows averaged 60% lower in SHR than in WKY.  Flows to individual skeletal muscles averaged 76% lower in SHR than in WKY regardless of the muscle fiber type.  Thus, modifications exist in the hindlimb skeletal muscle vasculature of SHR that reduces the capillary exchange capacity and limit the capacity of deliver flow at a given perfusion pressure gradient.
Production of thrombi on intact endothelium by use of antiheparin agents in vivo.  It had been suggested that antithrombin activity on the surface of intact endothelial cells may play a role in inhibiting platelet adhesion and thrombus formation.  The antithrombin activity may be due to thrombomodulin or to activation of antithrombin III by glycosaminoglycans or thrombomodulin, or possibly a combination of these.  This inhibitory activity has been shown to be affected by such antiheparin agents as protamine, hexadimethrine bromide (Polybrene; Aldrich Chemical Co., Milwaukee, Wis.) and platelet factor 4, as well as by such enzymes as heparinase and heparitinase.  We have used a hamster cheek pouch preparation to observe thrombus formation in vivo in a normal vascular flow, to determine whether the production of thrombi by thrombin can be enhanced by antiheparin agents.  After intra-arterial injection or topical application of protamine or hexadimethrine bromide, platelet adhesion and thrombus formation on intact arteriolar endothelium was produced by a dose of thrombin, which when injected alone had no effect.  No thrombi were found in venules or capillaries.  Injection of heparin before or after the antiheparin agents necessitated a larger dose to enhance the action of thrombin.  On electron microscopy the thrombi were found to consist primarily of platelets adherent to an intact endothelium.  The possible clinical implications of these observations are discussed.
Clues to the electrocardiographic diagnosis of subtle Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome in children.  The electrocardiographic diagnosis of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (WPW) may be missed because delta waves can be subtle in children, so we examined 66 electrocardiograms from patients with proven WPW, 24 from those with questionable WPW ("subtle WPW"), and 369 consecutive electrocardiograms from control patients to identify additional clues that WPW might be present.  Three features were notable in WPW: no Q wave in left chest leads (88%), PR interval less than 100 milliseconds (80%), and left axis deviation (33%).  In subtle WPW these findings were similar: 79%, 67%, and 46%, respectively.  By comparison, 5% of control subjects had no Q wave, 16% had a PR interval of less than 100 milliseconds, and 4% had left axis deviation (all p less than 0.001).  The coexistence of two of these features was common (74%) in WPW and subtle WPW (63%) but rare (2%) in control subjects (p less than 0.001).  A PR interval of less than 100 milliseconds was less specific before 1 year of age, but 89% of patients with WPW had a QRS duration of greater than 80 milliseconds versus 2% of control subjects (p less than 0.001).  Obvious WPW disappeared later in 11 patients; however, left axis deviation or lack of a Q wave persisted in eight (p less than 0.01).  We conclude that the diagnosis of WPW in children, even when subtle, is suggested by the presence of these four changes.  Preexcitation may persist in some patients in whom overt delta waves are no longer present.
A comparison of coarctation resection and subclavian flap angioplasty using ultrasonographically monitored postocclusive reactive hyperemia   The reported relatively high incidence of early restenosis at the coarctation repair site with subclavian flap angioplasty, especially in infants less than 3 months of age, prompted a physiologically oriented analysis of relief of obstruction from coarctation after subclavian flap angioplasty versus resection and end-to-end anastomosis in infancy.  Twenty-one patients who had undergone repair of coarctation in infancy by either subclavian flap angioplasty (nine patients) (median age 8 years) or resection and end-to-end anastomosis (12 patients) (median age 8 years) were evaluated by Doppler spectrum analysis of the blood flow velocities in the femoral artery at rest and during reactive hyperemia.  The median resting right upper to lower limb systolic pressure difference (with interquartile range) was similar in the angioplasty, resection and anastomosis, and control groups: -5 mm Hg (18 mm Hg), 0 mm Hg (12 mm Hg), and -2.5 mm Hg (10 mm Hg), respectively.  Also, similar resting values for the maximum frequency of the advancing curve and the pulsatility and resistance indices were measured in the three groups.  During reactive hyperemia of the leg, however, a significant hemodynamic obstruction across the repair site became clinically manifest in the angioplasty group only, as documented by a lower pulsatility index in comparison with the control group (p = 0.01, Mann-Whitney U test).  Comparison of the hemodynamic results between the angioplasty and resection and anastomosis groups in subdivisions of infants operated on at an age of less or greater than 3 months, both at rest and during reactive hyperemia, showed, already at rest, a significantly lower value for the pulsatility index in the former angioplasty subdivision (p = 0.05, Student's t test), indicating a significant resistance at the coarctation repair site in the angioplasty patients operated on before the third month of life.  A disadvantage of angioplasty (compared with resection and anastomosis) was noted when angioplasty was performed before the third month of life, and an unequivocal lack of advantage was noted when performed beyond that period regarding relief of obstruction from coarctation.  In addition, a definite potential for adverse long-term effects on the hemodynamics of the left upper limb after subclavian flap angioplasty in infancy has been documented.  For these reasons we prefer to perform resection and end-to-end anastomosis for repair of coarctation in infancy.
Studies of myocardial protection in the immature heart. II. Evidence for importance of amino acid metabolism in tolerance to ischemia.  This study tests the importance of amino acid transamination in determining the tolerance of immature hearts to ischemic damage.  Amino acid transamination was inhibited metabolically by pretreatment with aminooxyacetic acid.  The aminooxyacetic acid dose and duration were determined by incubating in vitro tissue homogenate and showing that an 8 mmol/L AOA dose for 5 minutes blocked 90% of alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase activity.  Control studies in nonischemic hearts showed that coronary perfusion with aminooxyacetic acid for 5 minutes did not impair myocardial performance.  In contrast, pretreatment of immature puppies with aminooxyacetic acid severely impaired recovery after 45 minutes of normothermic global ischemia (30% versus 85% recovery in untreated hearts, p less than 0.05).  Biochemical analyses of hearts undergoing ischemia showed aminooxyacetic acid to limit lactate production, impair glutamate utilization, prevent alanine production, and limit succinate accumulation (p less than 0.05).  These data suggest that amino acid transamination is an important adaptive process in the immature heart that improves its resistance to ischemic damage.
Warm induction blood cardioplegia in the infant. A technique to avoid rapid cooling myocardial contracture.  The use of profound hypothermia and total circulatory arrest for repair of heart defects in neonates usually involves a period of systemic and myocardial bypass cooling.  Rapid cooling of muscle (skeletal, smooth, and myocardial) can result in contracture through elevation of cytosolic calcium levels.  The increased myocardial tone caused by cooling might render the heart more vulnerable to a subsequent period of cardioplegic ischemic arrest.  Infants may be more susceptible to contracture because their small body mass allows more rapid myocardial temperature change when prearrest bypass cooling is used.  The influence of avoiding rapid myocardial cooling before induced cardioplegic arrest was analyzed in a group of infants weighing less than 6 kg at the time of open cardiac operation.  Myocardial ischemic arrest by warm (37 degrees C) induction blood cardioplegia was used in 57 infants and compared with results in 440 infants treated with standard blood cardioplegia.  Multivariate logistic regression analysis revealed that patient diagnosis, weight, and age at operation were significant risk factors for operative mortality.  The use of warm induction blood cardioplegia had a strongly positive independent effect on survival (p = 0.0003) for any patient weight, age, or diagnostic group.  We recommend the avoidance of rapid myocardial cooling on bypass in all patients before induction of cardioplegic ischemic arrest.
Efficacy and safety of low- and high-dose sotalol versus propranolol in the prevention of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias early after coronary artery bypass operations.  Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias are reported in up to 40% of patients early after coronary artery bypass graft operations.  In a randomized study, we compared the efficacy and safety of the class III antiarrhythmic beta-blocking drug sotalol versus propranolol at low and high doses in the prevention of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias in 429 consecutive patients after coronary artery bypass graft operations.  Patients with severely depressed left ventricular function and other contraindications for beta-blockers were excluded.  From the fourth hour up to the sixth day after coronary artery bypass, 74 patients received low-dose sotalol (40 mg every 8 hours), 66 patients low-dose propranolol (10 mg every 6 hours), 133 patients high-dose sotalol (80 mg every 8 hours), and 156 patients high-dose propranolol (20 mg every 6 hours).  Baseline characteristics were comparable in all groups.  Supraventricular tachyarrhythmia was observed in 10 of 72 (13.9%) who received low-dose sotalol, 12 of 64 (18.8%) who received low-dose propranolol, 13 of 119 (10.9%) who received high-dose sotalol, and 19 of 139 (13.7%) who received high-dose propranolol (not significant).  Drug-related adverse effects necessitating discontinuation of the drug occurred in four receiving low doses (2.9%) and in 31 receiving high doses (10.7%) (p less than 0.02).  In conclusion, no medication was found to be superior, although supraventricular tachyarrhythmias tended to be less prevalent in patients treated with sotalol than in those treated with propranolol.  Moreover, significantly fewer adverse effects were noted in both low-dose groups.  Therefore, low-dose beta-blocking treatment, especially low-dose sotalol, seems preferable.
Conjugal temporal arteritis.  We report the simultaneous occurrence of biopsy-proven temporal arteritis in husband and wife.  Serologic and viral studies were negative, including viral culture of the wife's temporal artery.  The concurrent incidence of giant cell arteritis in a married couple would suggest a common exogenous exposure.
Development and prospective application of quantitative 2-day stress-rest Tc-99m methoxy isobutyl isonitrile SPECT for the diagnosis of coronary artery disease.  The clinical diagnostic accuracy of 2-day stress/rest quantitative Technetium-99m (Tc-99m) methoxy-isobutyl-isonitrile (Tc-sestamibi) single photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT) was assessed in a validation population of 61 patients from two different sites using two different camera/computer systems.  The study population was made up of 53 catheterized patients, 29 from Cedars-Sinai Medical Center (CSMC) and 24 from the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center (UTSMC), and eight UTSMC patients with a less than 5% pre-test likelihood of coronary artery disease.  Interpretation employed gender-specific normal limits developed in an additional 15 men and 8 women at CSMC with less than a 5% likelihood of significant coronary artery disease.  The results from CSMC compared with those from UTSMC were not different from each other.  The overall sensitivity for detection of patients with coronary artery disease (greater than or equal to 50% stenosis) was 94% (CSMC: 92%, UTSMC: 95%).  Overall specificity in the five patients with normal coronary arteriograms was 80% (CSMC: 67%, UTSMC: 100%).  The normalcy rate in patients with a low likelihood of coronary artery disease was 88%.  Vessel sensitivity was 85% (CSMC: 84%, UTSMC: 85%), while vessel specificity was 71% (CSMC: 72%, UTSMC: 69%).  There was also no significant difference in the sensitivities and specificities between male and female populations.  In addition, the agreement with coronary angiography for assessment of disease extent (normal coronary arteriogram, single or multivessel disease) was 75% (kappa = 0.6 +/- 0.1).  This study demonstrated that Tc-sestamibi SPECT by quantitative analysis is accurate for the detection and localization of coronary artery disease.  Furthermore, the CSMC quantitative method was shown to provide similar diagnostic accuracy when applied to data acquired at a different site using a different camera/computer system.
The estimation of post-test probability of coronary disease following exercise testing using the sequential application of two Bayesian methods.  Recent studies have revealed that Bayesian methods to estimate post-test probability following exercise testing differ in their sensitivity and specificity across the range of post-test probability.  To take advantage of the relative strengths of each method, we combined two of these methods into a single method (DUAL BAYES) and compared it with the two original methods in 436 patients who underwent stress testing followed within 2 months by coronary arteriography.  All patients had post-test probabilities determined using CADENZA (better sensitivity).  Those CADENZA-derived probabilities greater than or equal to 50% were substituted with post-test probabilities determined by Diamond and Forrester's original TABULAR method (better specificity).  Mean post-test probabilities were as follows: TABULAR 34, CADENZA 48, DUAL BAYES 37 (actual incidence 38%).  Comparison of sensitivity and specificity at every fifth percentile of post-test probability revealed that the sensitivity of DUAL BAYES was better than that of TABULAR and equal to that of CADENZA at thresholds less than or equal to 10 and that the specificity was better than that of CADENZA and equal to that of TABULAR at thresholds greater than or equal to 60.  Therefore using both methods as indicated above was better than using either method alone.
Clinical and electrophysiological characteristics of ventricular tachycardia in children with normal hearts.  Characteristics of 18 patients with clinical ventricular tachycardia (VT) and normal hearts documented by physical examination, echocardiography, and angiocardiography were analyzed.  There were 13 males and 5 females, aged 1 to 16 years (mean +/- SD, 9.7 +/- 4.8 years).  Six patients had hemodynamic instability during VT and the other 12 patients were hemodynamically stable.  Two patients (11%) presented with sustained VT and 16 (89%) with episodes of nonsustained VT at varying intervals (3 of 16 with repetitive monomorphic VT).  Among 14 patients on whom exercise tests were performed, seven had exercise-induced VT.  During electrophysiologic studies, VT was induced in 16 of 18 (89%) (in 13 patients with morphology identical to clinical VT).  VT was induced by programmed stimulation (single, double, and burst stimulation of the right atrium or right ventricular apex during sinus rhythm or during pacind for eight beats) in 5 of 18 (28%) patients; with isoproterenol, VT was aggravated spontaneously in 6 of 15 (40%) patients; and during stimulation VT was induced in 8 of 15 (53%) patients.  Among patients whose VT was not induced during programmed stimulation, VT was induced with the addition of isoproterenol in 11 of 12 (92%).  All 14 patients in follow-up are in stable condition, seven patients with medication and seven without medication.  Pediatric patients with normal hearts and clinically detected VT usually have VT induced by programmed stimulation, either with or without isoproterenol stimulation.
The role of beta-blockade therapy for ventricular tachycardia induced with isoproterenol: a prospective analysis.  Isoproterenol is sometimes required for ventricular tachycardia (VT) induction.  However, the role of beta-blockade for treatment of such VT has not been critically assessed.  The use of beta-blockade was evaluated prospectively in 14 consecutive patients who required isoproterenol 2.4 +/- 1.3 (+/- S.D.) micrograms/min to induce sustained monomorphic VT (greater than 30 seconds, or requiring termination due to hemodynamic collapse) after a negative baseline study.  The VT mechanisms were enhanced automaticity (group A, six patients), triggered automaticity (group B, three patients), and reentry (group C, five patients).  Groups A and B had serial intravenous electropharmacologic tests with propranolol alone (0.2 mg/kg), verapamil alone (0.15 mg/kg), and propranolol plus verapamil, and group C had serial tests with propranolol alone, procainamide or quinidine (class Ia drug) alone, and propranolol plus a class Ia drug until VT could no longer be induced.  All six patients in group A responded to propranolol alone.  In group B, one patient responded to verapamil alone, and two patients responded to propranolol plus verapamil.  In group C, three patients responded to propranolol alone, one patient responded to a class Ia drug alone, and one patient responded to propranolol plus a class Ia drug.  During a follow-up of 7 to 37 (17.9 +/- 10.7) (+/- S.D.) months, VT has not recurred in any patient.  Three patients treated initially with propranolol alone have required substitution of amiodarone due to refractory congestive heart failure.  In patients requiring isoproterenol for VT induction, beta-blockade alone appears to be effective in preventing reinduction of VT caused by enhanced automaticity.  A heterogeneous response occurs when the VT mechanisms are triggered automaticity or reentry.
Double-peaking circadian variation in the occurrence of sustained supraventricular tachyarrhythmias.  We studied 251 patients less than or equal to 65 years of age admitted for treatment of symptomatic supraventricular tachyarrhythmia to assess whether these arrhythmias begin evenly throughout the day or manifest circadian variation in occurrence.  The arrhythmias included 152 episodes of atrial fibrillation, 50 episodes of supraventricular reentry tachycardia, 30 episodes of atrial flutter, and 19 cases of ectopic atrial tachycardia.  A total of 209 patients could tell the exact time their symptoms had started.  In 38 of them (18%), the arrhythmia had begun between midnight and 6:00 AM, in 63 (30%) between 6:01 AM and noon, in 46 (22%) between noon and 6:00 PM, and in 62 (30%) between 6:01 PM and midnight.  This distribution differed significantly from uniform occurrence (chi square 8.7, p less than 0.05).  Fifty patients were using beta-adrenoceptor blocking agents when the arrhythmia occurred.  Compared with the other 159 patients, they had no morning surge of arrhythmias (20% versus 33.3% of episodes between 6:01 AM and noon), but instead a much higher incidence at night (34% versus 13.2% of episodes between midnight and 6:00 AM) (chi square 14.4, p less than 0.005).  We conclude that the frequency of onset of sustained supraventricular tachyarrhythmias varies with the time of day, showing nearly equal peaks in the morning and in the evening and a trough at night.  The modifying effect of beta-adrenoceptor blockage suggests that many morning arrhythmias are of adrenergic origin while other, probably vagal arrhythmogenic mechanisms, prevail at night.
Effects of xamoterol on inotropic and lusitropic properties of the human myocardium and on adenylate cyclase activity.  The purpose of the present study was to characterize the effects of xamoterol in the human myocardium.  In the presence of forskolin or milrinone, xamoterol increased isometric force of contraction, contraction velocity, and relaxation velocity in isolated, electrically driven preparations from human myocardium, but had no effect alone.  There was no difference in the effect of xamoterol between right atrial myocardium and left ventricular myocardium from nonfailing (NF), moderately failing (NYHA II-III), and severely failing (NYHA IV) human hearts.  The positive inotropic and lusitropic effects of isoprenaline were reduced depending on the severity of heart failure in left ventricular myocardium (i.e., NF greater than NYHA II-III greater than NYHA IV).  In the presence of norepinephrine, xamoterol produced negative inotropic effects similar to those of the beta-adrenoceptor antagonists pindolol and propranolol.  Xamoterol alone had no effects on force of contraction, whereas pindolol and propranolol markedly reduced contractile force.  In NYHA class IV, isoprenaline stimulated adenylate cyclase about twofold but xamoterol, like pindolol or propranolol, had no effect.  Experiments with the beta 1- and beta 2-selective antagonists CGP 207.12A and ICI 118.551, respectively, showed that the positive inotropic and lusitropic effects of xamoterol were mediated by beta 1-adrenoceptors.  Consistently, xamoterol had a selectivity of 13.8 at beta 1-adrenoceptors as measured in radioligand binding experiments.  It is concluded that xamoterol acts as a beta 1-adrenoceptor antagonist with a selectivity of 13.8 in human ventricular myocardium.  The compound has an intrinsic sympathomimetic activity, as it produces beta 1-adrenoceptor-mediated positive inotropic and lusitropic effects in the presence of forskolin.  The beneficial effects of xamoterol in patients with heart failure could be due to prevention of the detrimental effects of norepinephrine such as beta 1-adrenoceptor downregulation of an increase of Gi (inhibitory guanine-nucleotide binding protein).
New calcium antagonists: relevance of vasoselectivity.  The calcium antagonists are a heterogeneous class of drugs used to treat a number of cardiovascular disorders.  A new generation of calcium antagonists under development have a higher degree of selectivity for vascular smooth muscle and coronary vasculature compared with verapamil, nifedipine, and diltiazem.  The clinical relevance of vasoselectivity and its impact on drug selection are discussed.  The newer calcium antagonists are important alternatives to older agents and may be associated with improved tolerance and a reduced incidence of adverse effects.  Their place in therapy has yet to be defined by comparative studies of efficacy and safety.
Epidemiologic aspects of heart failure.  The prevalence of heart failure in Northwest London is 0.4%, a lower figure than that quoted for the United States.  Heart failure is a common reason (5%) for medical admission to the hospital in the London area.  The problem of heart failure is predominantly in persons over 65 years.  Coronary artery disease is the most frequent cause, and hypertension is relatively uncommon.  In those patients admitted to the hospital, the prognosis is poor.
Can heart failure be prevented, delayed, or reversed?  A review of the clinical course of chronic heart failure demonstrates that current outcomes remain highly unsatisfactory both in mortality and perhaps more important in morbidity.  The extraordinary satisfactory functional responses seen in patients who undergo cardiac transplantation clearly identify the primary cause as the status of the heart itself, whatever the pathophysiologic adjustments of the neuroendocrine system, and interventions of the wide variety of drugs.  Since donor hearts are unlikely to be available even from younger sufferers of these clinical syndromes, prevention must be the hallmark.  Protection of the viability of myocytes, such as in acute myocarditis and acute infarction, is essential.  Myocardial collagen undergoes continual synthesis, and production is greatly stimulated in the presence of hypertrophy caused by increased wall stress.  It is possible that excess collagen is intimately involved with diastolic ventricular dysfunction, but that this may be a reversible process if the collagen-producing stimulus is removed.  Thus reduction in wall stress and reversibility of ventricular hypertrophy appear to be promising directions.  However, to limit the catastrophic effects of chronic heart failure, early recognition of the precursors of these syndromes, prevention of progression, and surgical intervention in valvular heart disease at an optimal point in time are essential.
Regional blood flow supply and demand in heart failure.  Heart failure results not only in a fall in cardiac output but also in a redistribution of blood flow favoring some regional beds (the brain and the heart) at the expense of others (the kidney and working skeletal muscle).  The chronic resting hypoperfusion of striated muscle is further compromised with exercise.  Maladaptive vasoconstrictor control mechanisms prevent the redirection of blood flow from nonworking muscle and liver to working muscle.  This inappropriate preservation of nonworking organ perfusion further compromises the functional capacity of working muscle and is associated with evidence for metabolic deconditioning with reduced oxygen extraction and impaired oxidative phosphorylation.  It is becoming increasingly clear that the clinical response to the inotropic and vasodilator therapy used in heart failure is in part dependent on the differing regional blood flow profiles of the various agents studied.  The ability of the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors to redirect blood flow away from nonworking regional beds to exercising muscle, and thereby to reestablish an appropriate physiologic response to changing metabolic needs, may be the overriding reason for their long-term efficacy.  Certainly in the future the comprehensive therapy of heart failure will have to take into consideration not only central hemodynamic but also regional blood flow/supply and demand issues.
Compensation and overcompensation in congestive heart failure.  The compensatory mechanisms that develop in response to heart failure have been well defined.  In this review, it is argued that each compensatory mechanism leads to overcompensation and that there is no way to distinguish between the beneficial aspects of the former and the harmful effects of the latter.  Therapeutic agents that maintain rather than decrease blood pressure might perhaps be more beneficial because of the crucial role of hypotension in initiating both compensation and overcompensation.
Medical management of chronic heart failure: inotropic, vasodilator, or inodilator drugs?  On the basis of pathophysiologic mechanisms, the medical therapy of today for chronic heart failure is reviewed.  The advantages and disadvantages of the vasodilator drugs and the inotropic drugs are presented.  Finally, the therapeutic value of the inodilator drugs, which combine the central myocardial effects of positive inotropic agents with those of peripheral vasodilators, is discussed.  In particular, the orally available dopaminergic agents, such as ibopamine, which interact with beta-receptors in the heart (mediating a positive inotropic effect) as well as with dopaminergic receptors in the peripheral vessels (mediating a systemic vasodilator effect) and in the kidneys (potentiating the natriuretic effect of diuresis), seem to be an advancement in the modern medical therapy of chronic heart failure.  Data are shown during long-term treatment with ibopamine, in which the sustained clinical benefit in heart failure was not diminished, despite a decrease of the adrenergic receptors in blood cells.  Dopamine plasma concentration was permanently normalized during long-term treatment.  The discrepancy between clinical improvement and the measured adrenergic downregulation may be due to the interference of the inodilator with neurohormonal systems at multiple sites and is probably independent of receptor activation.  It is suggested that the biosynthesis of noradrenaline is improved by increasing intracellular dopamine transport.
Physiology and pharmacology of cardiovascular catecholamine receptors: implications for treatment of chronic heart failure.  In the sympathetic nervous system the physiologic effects of the endogenous catecholamines noradrenaline (NA) and adrenaline (A) are mediated by alpha- and beta-adrenoreceptors (ARs).  Both AR-types can be subdivided into two major subtypes: alpha-ARs into alpha-1 (predominant effect: vasoconstriction) and alpha-2 (presynaptic: inhibition of NA-release; postsynaptic: vasoconstriction), beta-ARs into beta-1 (cardiac effects, renal renin release, and lipolysis) and beta-2 (presynaptic: facilitation of NA-release; postsynaptic: vascular, bronchial, and uterine smooth muscle relaxation, glycogenolysis and possibly part of the A-mediated cardiac effects).  During the last 30 years growing evidence has accumulated that dopamine (DA), the third endogenous catecholamine and the immediate precursor of NA, may also cause peripheral effects through stimulation of specific DA-receptors, in addition to its known action at alpha- and beta-ARs.  It is now well accepted that at least two different DA-receptors are present in many peripheral tissues (DA1 and DA2), including those of the cardiovascular and autonomic nervous system.  They seem to be involved in dilation of certain vascular beds, inhibition of NA-release during nerve stimulation, natriuresis, and aldosterone release.  In chronic heart failure cardiac beta-AR function decreases (presumably due to endogenous "down-regulation" by the elevated catecholamines), and this decrease is related to the severity of heart failure (judged clinically by New York Heart Association functional class).  The human heart contains both functional beta-1 and beta-2 ARs; cardiac beta-1 and beta-2 ARs seem to be differentially affected by different kinds of heart failure; in end-stage dilated cardiomyopathy beta-1 ARs are selectively reduced, whereas beta-2 ARs are nearly normal.
How to select a drug for the long-term treatment of chronic heart failure.  First-line drugs for the treatment of chronic congestive heart failure should produce immediate symptomatic benefit, improve exercise tolerance, and thereby improve the quality of life.  They should preferentially be active as monotherapy or at least reduce the need for comedication.  The drugs must be safe and well tolerated by patients and change, in the end, the natural history of the disease, so that sudden death will be prevented and life expectancy improves.  None of the currently available drugs satisfies all these criteria.  Diuretics, digitalis, converting-enzyme inhibitors, and ibopamine come close to the described ideal.
The placebo effect in heart failure.  Many patients who are enrolled in controlled clinical trials of new drugs for the treatment of heart failure show favorable hemodynamic and clinical responses to placebo therapy.  This "placebo effect" results from both the creation of a supportive therapeutic environment and the spontaneous improvement that is commonly seen when measurements of symptoms and cardiac function are repeated frequently over long intervals of time.  Three months of treatment with a placebo produces a reduction in symptoms in 25% to 35% of patients, an increase in cardiac output and a decrease in pulmonary wedge pressure, and an increase in exercise tolerance of up to 90 to 120 seconds.  Physicians commonly seek to maximize the "placebo effect," since the goal of treatment in the clinical setting is to improve the quality of the patient's life.  On the other hand, clinical investigators seek to minimize the "placebo effect," since the goal of a research study is to test the hypothesis that the new drug is superior to a placebo.
Efficacy of ibopamine in the treatment of heart failure.  Loss of myocardial contractility, reflexly enhanced vasoconstriction, and neuroendocrine excitation are the pathophysiologic hallmarks of low-output heart failure.  Drugs that counter both consequences afford considerable therapeutic potential in retarding and perhaps even in staying the consequences of the syndrome.  Ibopamine possesses such potential through its unique ability to stimulate both dopaminergic- and beta-adrenoreceptors in the heart and circulatory system.  Stimulation of dopaminergic- receptors and beta 2-adrenoreceptors results in vasodilatation in all regional vascular territories.  beta 2-Adrenoreceptor agonist activity also affords mild positive inotropic activity in the heart, whereas stimulation of presynaptic dopaminergic- receptors (DA2) attenuates the increased sympathetic neural outflow.  The drug also suppresses the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in addition to having a direct natriuretic activity.  The pharmacodynamic effects of ibopamine, exerted through its metabolite epinine, are translated into measurable therapeutic benefits in patients with chronic heart failure.  The increase in peripheral blood flow induced in all regional vascular territories, including the kidneys, is associated with increased cardiac output and stroke volume and reduction in left ventricular pressure work, wall stress, and myocardial oxygen consumption.  Plasma norepinephrine, angiotensin, and aldosterone are also reduced, and renal sodium excretion is enhanced.  These hemodynamic and neuroendocrine activities, which are not subject to tolerance during sustained administration of the drug, are accompanied by clinically significant improvement in symptoms, exercise tolerance, and the New York Heart Association classification of disability.  More important, no proarrhythmic effects have been observed during sustained treatment, and the minimal side effects observed during long-term treatment enhance the safety profile of the drug.
Cardioprotective effects of amlodipine on ischemia and reperfusion in two experimental models.  The cardioprotective effect of amlodipine, a long-acting dihydropyridine derivative, was studied in 2 experimental models of ischemia and reperfusion.  Isolated and blood-perfused feline hearts were made globally ischemic for 60 minutes and then reperfused for 60 minutes.  Alterations of left ventricular developed pressure and compliance were monitored in both amlodipine-treated hearts and saline-treated control animals.  Changes in perfusion pressure indicated that amlodipine significantly reduced myocardial oxygen consumption and coronary vascular resistance.  Furthermore, a progressive increase in resting left ventricular diastolic pressure indicated that amlodipine, administered before the onset of global ischemia, attenuated the development of ischemic contracture.  Return of contractile function 60 minutes after reperfusion and maintenance of tissue concentrations of electrolytes were significantly better in the amlodipine-treated group than in the control animals.  In intact canine hearts, regional myocardial ischemia was induced for 90 minutes, followed by 6 hours of reperfusion.  Although the hemodynamic variables and the size of the region of risk did not differ significantly between treated animals and control animals, the infarct size was significantly smaller in the amlodipine-treated group than in the control animals, and a gradual reduction in coronary blood flow was observed in the control group that was prevented in the amlodipine group.  A comparison of these findings with those observed with oxygen radical scavengers also is discussed.  A detailed report of these studies was published in The American Journal of Cardiology (1989;64:101I-116I).  This review is included here to maintain continuity of the symposium for the convenience of the reader.
Role of echocardiography in acute myocardial infarction.  Interventional therapies such as thrombolytic agents, angioplasty and surgery have emerged as important options in the management of patients with myocardial infarction.  These therapies are aimed at improving myocardial perfusion with the ultimate improvement or restoration of myocardial function.  Two-dimensional echocardiography with digital storage and display is an ideal technique for temporally monitoring regional ventricular function and the effectiveness of interventional therapy.  By design, 2-dimensional echocardiography is noninvasive and can be performed conveniently at the bedside.  For these reasons, echocardiography is the principal imaging technique at Indiana University Hospital for patients with acute myocardial infarction.  Computer retrieval of echocardiograms can be achieved in about 10 seconds at the nurses' station in the coronary care unit.  With the availability of such an examination, the physician has a better understanding of the site, size and function of the infarct area.  The state of the noninfarcted myocardium is also assessed and may be critical to the patient's prognosis.  With the digital recordings, serial studies can be displayed side-by-side, making it easier for the physician to follow the natural history or to judge the effect of therapy.  Echocardiography also is useful in identifying many complications that can occur with myocardial infarction.  For these reasons, and because echocardiography will also show related cardiac problems, it is indispensable in the management of acute myocardial infarction.
Progress in cardioprotection: the role of calcium antagonists.  Calcium antagonists are now widely used for the treatment of clinical hypertension and angina pectoris.  They are efficacious for the treatment of vasospastic, fixed atherosclerotic and mixed angina; they reduce the incidence of silent ischemia; and they have been shown to reduce postmyocardial infarct angina.  Experimental data suggest that they may have certain cardioprotective properties in cases of acute myocardial ischemia and infarction, stunned myocardium, diastolic dysfunction, left ventricular hypertrophy and atherosclerosis.  Moreover, they have been shown to improve exercise performance, as well as the diastolic abnormalities in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.  In animals, they may delay or reduce the extent of myocardial necrosis after coronary occlusion or coronary occlusion followed by reperfusion, and in low doses that do not alter the hemodynamic profile, they have been shown to enhance the return of ventricular function in animals with stunned myocardium.  However, the early first-generation calcium antagonists (nifedipine, verapamil, diltiazem) have not been shown to reduce myocardial infarct size or to enhance survival in patients with acute myocardial infarction.  There now are clinical studies that suggest that, unlike beta blockers or nitrates, nifedipine may slow the development of atherosclerotic progression in humans over a 2-year period, and it seems likely that in the 1990s there will be further expansion of the use of calcium antagonists for not only angina and hypertension but also for aspects of cardioprotection.  That calcium antagonists may delay, prevent or possibly regress atherosclerotic lesions is an exciting possibility.
Bone mineral density in spontaneous hypertension: differential effects of dietary calcium and sodium.  Dietary calcium and sodium have been postulated to modify both bone mineral status and blood pressure regulation in humans and animals.  The spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) manifests several defects in calcium metabolism that may contribute to its hypertension.  Blood pressure and bone mineral status were measured in SHR and normotensive Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY) as a marker of whole animal calcium metabolism.  In addition, the effect of alterations in dietary calcium and sodium on bone status were examined.  At 6 weeks of age, seven male SHR and seven male WKY were placed on a control diet.  At the same age, 28 SHR and 28 WKY were randomized to four diets containing either 2.0% or 0.1% calcium and 1.0% or 0.25% sodium.  Four markers of bone mineral status were analyzed: bone density measured by direct photon absorptiometry, and total bone calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium content measured by atomic absorption spectrophotometry.  The SHR exhibited significantly lower levels (p less than 0.001) of bone density and bone magnesium content than the WKY, whereas bone phosphorus and calcium did not differ between the two strains.  The 2.0% calcium diets resulted in increased bone density and bone calcium content, and lower bone magnesium in both strains.  The 1.0% sodium diets were associated with decreased bone density in the SHR, but not in the WKY.  These findings identify another indicator of disturbed calcium metabolism in the SHR that may be related to impaired renal calcium handling.  They are consistent with previously reported reductions in renal calcium reabsorption and decreased intestinal calcium transport in older SHR.
Possible triggering of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation in normal hearts by psychological stressors: a report of two cases.  Paroxysmal atrial fibrillation was triggered by psychological stress in two patients, both of whom had normal echocardiograms and coronary angiography.  Neither patient was alcoholic or had ingested ethanol in relation to the onset of atrial fibrillation and both were free of metabolic derangements.  Possible mechanisms involved in the triggering of atrial fibrillation are discussed.
Incidence of perioperative myocardial ischemia detected by different electrocardiographic systems   To determine the extent to which different electrocardiographic systems account for differences in reported incidence of perioperative myocardial ischemia, the authors simultaneously recorded in 109 patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) the V5 or modified CM5 lead on five ECG systems by means of a specially constructed common V5 lead.  The systems included a Spacelabs Alpha 14 Model Series 3200 ECG Cardule at bandwidths of 0.05-125 Hz and 0.5-30 Hz (a typical operating room monitor), a Marquette Electronics MAC II ECG at 0.05-40 Hz and 0.05-100 Hz (a standard ECG), and a Del Mar Holter recorder at 0.1-100 Hz.  Relative ST-segment position and incidence of new ischemia compared to the preoperative ECG were determined in 109 sets of preinduction traces and 877 sets of intraoperative traces.  ST-segment position on the three recording systems conforming with the American Heart Association (AHA) low-frequency response recommendations (0.05 Hz) were similar.  Compared to the standard ECG, ST-segment position on the Spacelabs at 0.5-30 Hz was consistently more negative.  Displacement on the Holter was consistently less negative and less positive.  By the 0.1-mV displacement criterion for diagnosis of myocardial ischemia on any one ECG system, 16.5% of patients on arrival and 32.1% of patients intraoperatively suffered new myocardial ischemia.  Based on the operating room monitor, arrival and intraoperative ischemia were present in 15.6 and 27.5% of patients, respectively.  Ischemia at the same periods was less frequent by the standard ECG system (5.5 and 12.8%, respectively) and least frequent by the Holter recorder (4.6 and 8.3%, respectively).
Effect of halothane and isoflurane on postischemic "stunned" myocardium in the dog.  Short periods of coronary artery occlusion are known to produce prolonged periods of ventricular dysfunction.  The effects of halothane or isoflurane on contractility and metabolism in postischemic "stunned" myocardium were studied in an open-chest canine model in which the left anterior descending artery (LAD) was occluded for 15 min and then reperfused.  Regional function in the LAD and circumflex artery (CIRC) areas were measured with sonomicrometry, and metabolic data were determined from simultaneous arterial and venous measurements of oxygen and lactate.  Halothane and isoflurane produced equivalent decreases in systolic shortening in both normal (CIRC) and stunned (LAD) areas of the heart.  Furthermore, the amount of depression was similar with either halothane or isoflurane.  Halothane 0.75 MAC significantly decreased systolic shortening in both the LAD region (from 38.8 +/- 25.9% to 11.0 +/- 21.8%) and in the CIRC region (from 116.7 +/- 24.7% to 87.5 +/- 23.3%).  At equivalent MAC concentrations of isoflurane, the values were 42.5 +/- 45.7 to -7.0 +/- 49.9% in the LAD region and 91.5 +/- 11.9% to 66.9 +/- 23.9% in the CIRC area.  At 1.5-MAC halothane, systolic shortening in the LAD region decreased from 47.9 +/- 47.2% to -0.6 +/- 20.3% and in the CIRC area from 114.6 +/- 16.8% to 76.0 +/- 18.7%.  Isoflurane at 1.5 MAC produced significant decreases, from 23.4 +/- 54.5% to -15.6 +/- 27.1% in the LAD region and from 94.4 +/- 33.2% to 61.3 +/- 28.2 in the CIRC area.
Patient profiling: individualization of hypertension therapy.  Although the stepped-care approach remains the cornerstone of antihypertensive therapy, the patient's profile must also be considered.  Important issues include the patient's age, race and activity level, potential for hypertensive complications, presence of other diseases, cost of medications and probability of adherence to the recommended drug regimen.  Nonpharmacologic treatment based on lifestyle changes is a useful adjunct to drug therapy, but it is not sufficient to control hypertension in most patients.  Selection of pharmacologic therapy must be based on a knowledge of each drug's mode of action and side effects, as well as the characteristics of special patient populations.
Preanaesthetic medication with clonidine.  The purpose of this study was to evaluate oral clonidine in a dose of 0.3 mg as a routine premedicant.  Sixty-nine normotensive female patients were studied in a randomized double-blind investigation in which clonidine was compared with an inert treatment.  Clonidine produced a significant reduction in anxiety (P less than 0.05) and sedation and a reduction in the sleep dose of methohexitone (P less than 0.05).  Tachycardia in response to intubation was attenuated by clonidine (P less than 0.05).  However, the magnitude of the increase in arterial pressure after intubation was not affected.  Intraoperative and postoperative hypotension were common after premedication with clonidine 0.3 mg and caution is urged in its use as a premedicant.
Combined alpha/beta-blockade versus beta 1-selective blockade in essential hypertension in black and white patients.  The purpose of this multicenter investigation was to determine the efficacy and safety of the alpha/beta-blocker labetalol versus the beta 1-selective beta-blocker atenolol in white and black patients with essential hypertension.  Equal numbers of black and white patients were enlisted to form four treatment groups (white patients taking either labetalol or atenolol and black patients taking either labetalol or atenolol).  Two hundred ninety-two patients (152 white and 140 black patients) with essential hypertension characterized by a standing diastolic blood pressure of 105 to 119 mm Hg (inclusive) were recruited for this trial.  Patients were randomized to either labetalol (dosage titrated from 200 to 1600 mg/day) or atenolol (dosage titrated from 50 to 100 mg/day).  The therapeutic goal was achievement of a standing diastolic blood pressure of 90 mm Hg or less or a fall of 15 mm Hg in diastolic pressure from baseline value at the end of the placebo run in period.  At the end of the study there were no significant differences in blood pressure or heart rate changes in the supine position between the labetalol and atenolol groups.  In contrast, labetalol produced greater reduction in both the standing systolic and diastolic blood pressure (-12/-13 mm Hg, respectively) compared with atenolol (-7/-9 mm Hg; p less than 0.05; p less than 0.005, respectively).  The greatest decrease in blood pressure was observed in white patients receiving labetalol.  In black patients the decrease in blood pressure was greater in those treated with labetalol compared with atenolol, particularly with respect to the systolic blood pressure.  We conclude that the alpha 1-blocking property of labetalol provides an additional lowering of the blood pressure over that seen with beta 1-blockade alone, especially in the standing position, and this enhanced efficacy is not confined to one radical group.
Elevated plasma noradrenaline concentrations in patients with low-output cardiac failure: dependence on increased noradrenaline secretion rates.  1.  Plasma noradrenaline concentrations are elevated in patients with congestive heart failure; however, the pathogenesis of these elevated noradrenaline levels is controversial.  2.  Possible mechanisms for elevated noradrenaline concentrations in patients with congestive heart failure include increased noradrenaline secretion, decreased clearance of noradrenaline, and a combination of increased secretion and decreased clearance.  3.  In the present study, plasma noradrenaline clearance and apparent secretion rates were determined using a whole-body steady-state radionuclide tracer method in six otherwise healthy patients with moderate degrees of low-output cardiac failure and in six normal control subjects.  4.  The venous plasma noradrenaline level was elevated in the patients with congestive heart failure as compared with the control subjects (4.18 +/- 1.34 versus 1.54 +/- 0.16 nmol/l, P less than 0.05).  There was no stimulation of the adrenal medulla as evident by normal plasma adrenaline levels in both groups (0.19 +/- 0.04 versus 0.18 +/- 0.02 nmol/l, not significant).  The apparent secretion rate of noradrenaline was elevated in the patients with congestive heart failure (4.75 +/- 1.95 versus 1.78 +/- 0.18 nmol min-1 m-2, P less than 0.05), whereas the clearance rate of noradrenaline was similar in the two groups (1.26 +/- 0.27 versus 1.16 +/- 0.02 l min-1 m-2, not significant).  5.  We conclude that the high peripheral venous plasma noradrenaline concentrations in patients with mildly decompensated low-output cardiac failure are initially due to increased secretion, rather than to decreased metabolic clearance, perhaps in response to diminished effective arterial blood volume.
Pineal hyperactivity in spontaneously hypertensive rats: muscarinic regulation of indole metabolism.  1.  Choline acetyltransferase activity and [3H]quinuclidinyl benzylate-binding sites were detected in the pineal gland of normotensive Wistar-Kyoto rats and of spontaneously hypertensive rats.  2.  In vitro, muscarinic activation by pilocarpine increased the pineal metabolic production of hydroxyindole derivatives up to 5-hydroxytryptamine and produced a less marked stimulation of melatonin biosynthesis.  3.  Electrical field stimulation of pineal gland slices caused similar metabolic effects.  4.  Muscarinic blockade with atropine inhibited the effects on hydroxyindole metabolism.  5.  [3H]Quinuclidinyl benzylate-binding sites, indicative of muscarinic receptors, were more numerous, and basal 5-hydroxytryptamine and melatonin levels were higher, in the pineal gland of spontaneously hypertensive rats compared with Wistar-Kyoto rats.  6.  The atropine-sensitive metabolic effects of pilocarpine and electrical field stimulation on the pineal gland were increased in spontaneously hypertensive rats compared with Wistar-Kyoto rats.
Evidence for abnormal Na+/H+ antiport activity detected by phosphorus nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy in exercising skeletal muscle of patients with essential hypertension.  1.  Exercise-induced pH changes in skeletal muscle were studied in a group of eight subjects with essential hypertension by using 31P n.m.r.  spectroscopy.  2.  Leucocyte Na+/H+ antiport activity was measured in vitro in the same subjects using a pH-sensitive fluorescent dye.  3.  Resting skeletal muscle pH and unstimulated leucocyte pH values were similar to those in control subjects, but increased Na+/H+ antiport activity was demonstrated in the leucocytes from hypertensive subjects by acid loading in vitro.  Decreased skeletal muscle acidification and an increased rate of pH recovery was also demonstrated in vivo in these same patients during an acid load induced by isotonic exercise.  4.  These findings suggest that the increased cellular Na+/H+ antiport activity, which has been demonstrated in vitro in essential hypertension, also affects the biochemical response of skeletal muscle to physiological levels of exercise.  This strengthens the argument that increased Na+/H+ antiport activity in hypertension is a generalized and physiologically relevant cellular abnormality.
Central retinal vein obstruction and axial length.  The axial lengths of 24 consecutive adult eyes with unilateral central retinal vein obstruction (CRVO) were compared with those of contralateral unaffected eyes and those of a control population.  The lengths of the two eyes of persons with a unilateral CRVO were not significantly different.  By contrast, eyes of persons with CRVO averaged 0.67 mm (approximately 2 diopters) shorter than their control counterparts (P = .03).  This anatomic difference may be a factor in the development of CRVO.
Delayed detection of coarctation in infancy: implications for timing of newborn follow-up.  During a recent 5-year period, 74 patients younger than 6 months of age were diagnosed with coarctation of the aorta.  Coarctation was correctly diagnosed in only 22% of patients prior to referral despite readily apparent femoral pulse abnormalities in 86%.  Infants whose symptoms were detected between 5 and 14 days of age were significantly more ill than infants outside this age range and had a high mortality rate (25%).  The number of associated cardiac defects was not related to the severity of clinical illness in this group, suggesting that closure of the ductus arteriosus is the primary determinate of disease severity.  Observations in two patients suggested that a detectable pulse discrepancy occurs between 3 and 5 days postnatally.  Upper extremity hypertension was found commonly in infants after 5 days of age despite the presence of congestive heart failure.  Earlier detection of coarctation in the newborn requires a diligent cardiovascular and peripheral pulse examination between 3 and 7 days of life, upper extremity and lower extremity blood pressure measurement, and a high index of suspicion.
Apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in a non-Oriental man.  Japanese investigators first described apical HCM in 2.9% of patients who had diagnostic left ventricular catheterization for suspected ischemic heart disease or cardiomyopathy.  This entity was initially thought to be limited to individuals of Asian origin and has been uncommonly described in patients of Western origin.  Patients of Western origin differ in several ways from those in the original description of Yamaguchi et al, but they both share the same classic criterion of hypertrophy of the left ventricular apex.  The major differences probably relate to the anatomic variation in the distribution of the left ventricular hypertrophy as described by Maron et al.  It is not known whether racial, genetic, or environmental factors account for the variation of disease expression in Asian and Western patients.  Our case illustrates that this diagnosis should be considered in patients who have chest pain (anginal or atypical) and markedly abnormal findings on electrocardiograms in the absence of hypertension or significant coronary artery disease.
Multiple arterial fenestrations, multiple aneurysms, and an arteriovenous malformation in a patient with subarachnoid hemorrhage.  We report the case of a 49-year-old, right-handed man with multiple vascular pathologies, including a fenestrated anterior communicating artery and middle cerebral artery, an aneurysm of the anterior communicating artery, multiple aneurysms of the middle cerebral artery, and an arteriovenous malformation.  Diagnoses were made through computed tomography, cerebral angiography, magnetic resonance imaging, and intraoperative dissection.  The lesions were managed surgically in stages with satisfactory results.  Congenital and hemodynamic factors may have combined to manifest in the anomalies present in this unique case.  We believe that no similar combination of vascular pathology has been reported previously.
Changes in myocardial ischemic threshold during daily activities.  This study assesses the variations in myocardial ischemic threshold (heart rate at the onset of ischemia) during daily activities in patients with ischemic episodes on Holter monitoring.  Eighty patients with known coronary artery disease, positive treadmill stress test results and greater than or equal to 2 ischemic episodes during a 24-hour period of Holter monitoring were studied.  The lowest and the highest ischemic thresholds were determined for each patient.  The mean lowest ischemic threshold was 85 beats/min, and the mean highest ischemic threshold was 109 beats/min.  The highest ischemic threshold was identical to ischemic threshold values noted during exercise.  Of the 895 ischemic episodes, 654 (74%) were preceded by a moderate (greater than 10%) increase in heart rate.  The variability of ischemic threshold (difference in percentage between the highest and lowest ischemic thresholds) increased with the number of ischemic episodes (range 2 to 60%).  However, in different patients with a similar number of ischemic episodes, different variability was observed.  These differences in ischemic thresholds are probably indirect indicators of the vasomotor activity of the coronary arteries in different patients.
Determinants and significance of diltiazem plasma concentrations after acute myocardial infarction. The Multicenter Diltiazem Postinfarction Trial Research Group.  A total of 1,975 plasma diltiazem concentrations were obtained from 1,067 patients enrolled in a multicenter secondary intervention study of diltiazem after acute myocardial infarction.  To evaluate the determinants and significance of diltiazem concentrations in this patient population, we related drug concentrations to a variety of clinical variables recorded on the case history forms.  Multiple linear regression analysis showed that (1) time from the last drug dose, (2) drug dose taken, (3) patient height (an index of lean body weight), and (4) patient age were important determinants of plasma concentration.  For an equivalent dose, plasma diltiazem concentrations in a 75-year-old patient were about double those of a 25-year-old patient.  Total weight and drug dose prescribed did not significantly affect plasma concentrations.  Whereas drug concentrations were higher (p = 0.01) among patients with left-sided heart failure, they were not altered by renal dysfunction, hepatic disease or beta blockers.  Diltiazem concentrations were a significant determinant of diastolic arterial pressure (p less than 10(-9), but neither systolic pressure nor heart rate were significantly related to diltiazem concentration.  The overall incidence of adverse experiences was not related to drug concentrations, but the occurrence of second- and third-degree atrioventricular block in the coronary care unit and the need for a temporary pacemaker were substantially higher among patients with a drug concentration greater than 150 ng/ml (7.4 and 1.9%, respectively) than among patients with lower concentrations (2.6% for atrioventricular block, 0.3% for pacemaker; p = 0.02 for each).  The risk of atrioventricular block was particularly increased by high diltiazem concentrations in the face of acute inferior infarction.  These results suggest that diltiazem's pharmacologic and clinical effects in a large population are concentration-related, and that the consideration of patient size, age, and left ventricular function in selecting a diltiazem dose may allow for effective drug therapy with a reduced likelihood of adverse effects.
Prehospital thrombolysis in acute myocardial infarction.  The benefit and risk of prehospital thrombolysis for acute myocardial infarction (AMI) were evaluated in a double-blind randomized trial.  Patients presenting less than 4 hours after symptom onset received 2 million units of urokinase as an intravenous bolus either before (group A, n = 40) or after (group B, n = 38) hospital admission.  The mean time interval from onset of symptoms to thrombolytic therapy was 85 +/- 51 minutes in group A and 137 +/- 50 minutes in group B (p less than 0.0005).  In 91% of the patients, thrombolytic therapy was administered less than 3 hours after symptom onset.  Complication rates during the pre- and in-hospital period were low and did not differ between groups.  Three patients died (1 in group A, 2 in group B) from reinfarction 7 to 14 days after admission.  Left-sided cardiac catheterization before discharge revealed a patency rate in the infarct-related artery of 61% in group A and 67% in group B (difference not significant).  Global left ventricular function and regional wall motion at the infarct site did not differ significantly between group A and B (ejection fraction 51 +/- 10%, n = 28 vs 53 +/- 14%, n = 28; wall motion -2.3 +/- 1.3 vs -2.2 +/- 1.1 standard deviation, respectively).  Also, peak creatine kinase did not differ significantly (838 +/- 634 U/liter in group A vs 924 +/- 595 U/liter in group B).  Prehospital thrombolysis using a bolus injection of urokinase has a low risk when performed by a trained physician with a mobile care unit.  The saving of 45 minutes in the early stage of an acute infarction through prehospital thrombolysis did not appear to be important for salvage of myocardial function.
Comparison of thallium-201 and technetium-99m hexakis 2-methoxyisobutyl isonitrile single-photon emission computed tomography for estimating the extent of myocardial ischemia and infarction in coronary artery disease.  Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) using thallium-201 (Tl-201) was compared with technetium-99m hexakis 2-methoxyisobutyl isonitrile (Tc-99m MIBI) in 24 patients with coronary artery diseaes.  Patients exercised to the same work load as each isotope was studied.  Normal and hypoperfused left ventricular mass was determined with an automated method.  Estimated total left ventricular mass was similar for both stress/redistribution Tl-201 and stress/rest Tc-99m MIBI images.  The mean estimated defect size in the redistribution Tl-201 images was 32 +/- 34.7 vs 33 +/- 38.4 g in the resting Tc-99m MIBI studies (difference not significant).  The individual determinations of defect mass were highly correlated (r = 0.93; p less than 0.0001).  Estimated defect size in the stress Tl-201 images (52 +/- 46.2 g) was significantly larger than the exercise Tc-99m MIBI estimates of defect mass (42 +/- 39.9 g; p less than 0.05).  A linear correlation existed between stress thallium and technetium estimates of defect size (r = 0.85) but 15 of 24 Tc-99m MIBI defects were smaller than the Tl-201 defects.  Partial redistribution of Tc-99m MIBI could explain the discordance.  Stress Tc-99m MIBI SPECT defect size determined by visual interpretation or by the use of isocount analysis may be smaller than what is seen with stress Tl-201 SPECT.
Temporal relation between left ventricular dysfunction and chest pain in coronary artery disease during activities of daily living.  Forty-three ambulatory patients with angina of increasing frequency underwent continuous monitoring of left ventricular (LV) function for an average of 2.9 +/- 1.9 hours to determine the incidence and temporal sequence of LV dysfunction, ST-segment depression and chest pain.  Indicators of ischemia were: a decrease in ejection fraction greater than 5% lasting greater than 1 minute; horizontal or downsloping ST-segment depression of greater than or equal to 1 mm; or onset of the patient's typical chest pain complex, or a combination of these.  During the monitoring interval, subjects performed daily activities such as sitting, walking, climbing stairs and eating.  In 11 patients, 22 episodes of chest pain or ST-segment depression, or both, were observed.  Eighteen episodes were accompanied by a decrease in ejection fraction (9 patients); chest pain accompanied the decrease in ejection fraction during 13 episodes, whereas ST-segment changes occurred during 7.  In 12 of 13 episodes the decrease in ejection fraction began earlier than the onset of chest pain, whereas in 1 patient ejection fraction decrease and chest pain onset started at the same time.  The average interval from a decrease in ejection fraction to the onset of chest pain was 56 +/- 41 seconds (range 0 to 120).  ST changes occurred after the onset of a decrease in ejection fraction in 6 of 7 episodes.  The average interval from the onset of ejection fraction decrease and the onset of ST change was 99 +/- 91 seconds.  These data suggest that LV dysfunction manifested by a decrease in ejection fraction is an earlier indicator of myocardial ischemia than is angina pectoris or electrocardiographic evidence of ischemia.
Recanalization of chronic, totally occluded coronary arteries by new angioplasty systems.  The benefit and safety of new angioplasty equipment as compared with the conventional guidewire approach was evaluated in 154 consecutive patients.  with chronic, totally occluded coronary arteries.  The protocol followed a stepwise design: first, conventional guidewires and low-profile balloons were used, followed by "balloon-on-the-wire" systems (Probe, Ace) or by a shaft-enforced, tip-deflecting catheter (Omniflex).  In 97 patients with occlusions of 2 to 12 weeks' duration, recanalization was achieved in 51 patients (53%) with the conventional approach and in 29 patients with the new devices (balloon-on-the-wire [n = 5], Omniflex [n = 24]), thereby raising the success rate to 82%.  In 57 occlusions of greater than 12 weeks' duration, the recanalization attempt was successful in 58%, mediated in 16 patients (28%) by the Omniflex catheter and in 5 patients by balloon-on-the-wire systems.  There were no life-threatening complications and only 1 (0.6%) emergency bypass operation was necessary.  New angioplasty devices are therefore of considerable value in the attempt to improve the results of coronary angioplasty in chronic total occlusions.
Arterial vasodilator effects of the dihydropyridine calcium antagonist amlodipine alone and in combination with verapamil in systemic hypertension.  The arterial vasodilator properties of the dihydropyridine calcium antagonist amlodipine were compared with the effects of vascular muscle cyclic guanosine monophosphate production by sodium nitroprusside and with the effects of a combined infusion of amlodipine and the nondihydropyridine calcium antagonist verapamil in 8 untreated patients with primary hypertension.  Arterial vasodilation was assessed by measurement of changes of forearm blood flow by mercury in Silastic strain-gauge plethysmography during brachial artery drug infusions.  Forearm blood flow increased during amlodipine infusions (0.4 to 45 micrograms/min/100 ml forearm tissue) from 2.9 +/- 1.7 to a maximum of 23.6 +/- 7.6 ml/min/100 ml (687%), while sodium nitroprusside caused an increase from 3.0 +/- 1.8 to 16.2 +/- 5.4 ml/min/100 ml (449%), attesting to the importance of transmembrane calcium influx for the maintenance of vascular tone.  The addition of verapamil 40 micrograms/min/100 ml to an infusion of amlodipine 44.5 micrograms/min/100 ml resulted in a further increase of forearm blood flow, from 23.6 +/- 7.6 to 34.4 +/- 9.8 ml/min/100 ml (p less than 0.05).  The precise mechanisms of this finding have yet to be elucidated but may be due to interactions of the effects of the binding of these 2 chemically and pharmacologically different calcium antagonists to distinct binding sites at calcium channels.  The clinical relevance of this observation for the treatment of coronary artery disease and systemic hypertension needs further study.
Left ventricular filling impairment in asymptomatic chronic alcoholics.  Systolic left ventricular dysfunction is relatively common in even asymptomatic alcoholics, but whether diastolic function is also altered is much less well-studied.  We used M-mode and Doppler echocardiography to study left ventricular size, mass, systolic function and diastolic filling in 32 alcoholics free of clinically detectable heart disease and in 15 healthy control subjects.  Left ventricular mass index and posterior wall thickness were higher in alcoholics than in controls, but there was no statistically significant difference either in end-diastolic size or in systolic ventricular function.  More abnormalities were found in the Doppler indexes of diastolic function, however.  The alcoholics had a prolonged relaxation time (200 +/- 6 vs 184 +/- 5 ms [mean +/- standard error], p less than 0.05), a decreased peak early diastolic velocity (52 +/- 2 vs 60 +/- 3 cm/s, p less than 0.05), a slower acceleration of the early flow (410 +/- 18 vs 552 +/- 43 cm/s2, p less than 0.01), and a higher atrial-to-early peak velocity ratio (0.74 +/- 0.04 vs 0.60 +/- 0.05, p less than 0.05).  This pattern of changes suggests a primary abnormality in the relaxation of the left ventricle.  In multivariate analyses, the abnormalities in the Doppler indexes were independent of the duration of alcoholism, the quantity of the most recent ethanol exposure and the increased mass of the left ventricle.  Impaired early filling of the left ventricle due to delayed relaxation is common in asymptomatic alcoholics and may in fact be the earliest functional sign of preclinical alcoholic cardiomyopathy.
Physiologic peripheral pulmonic stenosis in infancy.  We studied 14 premature infants with the clinical diagnosis of peripheral pulmonic stenosis (PPS) and 15 normal full-term neonates by echocardiographic Doppler examinations.  The PPS group had an average main pulmonary artery (PA) diameter similar to the control group (0.91 vs 0.96 cm, difference not significant), but had smaller branch PA diameters: right PA = 0.41 vs 0.50 cm, p less than 0.001, and left PA = 0.41 vs 0.49 cm, p less than 0.001.  The PPS group also had greater peak velocities in the main PA (76 vs 63 cm/s, p less than 0.05), right PA (193 vs 118 cm/s, p less than 0.001) and left PA (187 vs 123 cm/s, p less than 0.001).  Similarly, the ratio of peak velocity in the branch/main PA was greater for the PPS group: right/main PA peak velocity = 2.91 vs 1.92, p less than 0.01, and left/main PA peak velocity = 2.73 vs 1.99, p less than 0.05.  The calculated right ventricular output for the PPS group was more than the control group: 437 vs 261 ml/min/kg, p less than 0.001.  Hematocrits were not done on the control group, but the PPS group had an average hematocrit which was low (34%).  It is concluded that patients with PPS have mild underdevelopment of the PA branches, with consequent increased flow velocity and turbulent flow.  This turbulent flow may be contributed to by increased cardiac output and mild anemia.
Spectrum of hemodynamic changes in cardiac tamponade.  To investigate the pathophysiology of cardiac tamponade, the hemodynamics of 77 consecutive patients with greater than 150 ml of pericardial effusion were studied.  Patients were classified into 3 groups based on the equilibration of intrapericardial with right atrial and pulmonary arterial wedge pressures (mm Hg): group I (n = 16), intrapericardial pressure was less than right atrial and pulmonary arterial wedge pressures; group II (n = 13), intrapericardial pressure was equilibrated with right atrial but not pulmonary arterial wedge pressures; group III (n = 48), intrapericardial pressure was equilibrated with right atrial and pulmonary arterial wedge pressures.  Pericardiocentesis produced the following changes: group I--significant (p less than 0.03) decreases in intrapericardial pressure (7 +/- 2 mm Hg), right atrial pressure (3 +/- 2 mm Hg), pulmonary arterial wedge pressure (2 +/- 2 mm Hg), and the inspiratory decrease in arterial systolic pressure (3 +/- 4 mm Hg) but no significant change in cardiac output; group II--significant (p less than 0.02) decreases in intrapericardial pressure (11 +/- 5 mm Hg), right atrial pressure (6 +/- 4 mm Hg), pulmonary arterial wedge pressure (4 +/- 5 mm Hg), and inspiratory decrease in arterial systolic pressure (8 +/- 7 mm Hg), and increase in cardiac output (1.1 +/- 1.2 liters/min); group III--significant (p less than 0.001) decreases in intrapericardial pressure (16 +/- 7 mm Hg), right atrial pressure (9 +/- 4 mm Hg), pulmonary arterial wedge pressure (8 +/- 5 mm Hg), inspiratory decrease in arterial systolic pressure (17 +/- 11 mm Hg), and increase in cardiac output (2.8 +/- 1.5 liters/min).  The changes after pericardiocentesis in all parameters were significantly (p less than 0.05) greater in group III than in groups I or II except for the change in right atrial pressure, which was not significantly different in groups II versus III.  The changes after pericardiocentesis indicate pericardial effusion caused the greatest abnormalities in group III but also caused significant abnormalities of pressure and flow in group II and of pressure alone in group I.
Transesophageal echocardiography in critically ill patients.  The feasibility, safety and clinical impact of transesophageal echocardiography were evaluated in 51 critically ill intensive care unit patients (28 men and 23 women; mean age 63 years) in whom transthoracic echocardiography was inadequate.  At the time of transesophageal echocardiography, 30 patients (59%) were being mechanically ventilated.  Transesophageal echocardiography was performed without significant complications in 49 patients (96%), and 2 patients with heart failure had worsening of hemodynamic and respiratory difficulties after insertion of the transesophageal probe.  The most frequent indication, in 25 patients (49%), was unexplained hemodynamic instability.  Other indications included evaluation of mitral regurgitation severity, prosthetic valvular dysfunction, endocarditis, aortic dissection and potential donor heart.  In 30 patients (59%), transesophageal echocardiography identified cardiovascular problems that could not be clearly diagnosed by transthoracic echocardiography.  In the remaining patients, transesophageal echocardiography permitted confident exclusion of suspected abnormalities because of its superior imaging qualities.  Cardiac surgery was prompted by transesophageal echocardiographic findings in 12 patients (24%) and these findings were confirmed at operation in all.  Therefore, transesophageal echocardiography can be safely performed and has a definite role in the diagnosis and expeditious management of critically ill cardiovascular patients.
Aspirin in the primary prevention of angina pectoris in a randomized trial of United States physicians.  PURPOSE: The objective of this study was to examine the effect of low-dose aspirin (325 mg on alternate days) on the primary prevention of angina pectoris in the United States Physicians' Health Study.  Despite a postulated role of platelets in atherogenesis and myocardial ischemia, the effect of chronic platelet inhibition on the development of clinical angina pectoris is unknown.  SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The Physicians' Health Study is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial among 22,071 male physicians aged 40 to 84 years, free from previous myocardial infarction, stroke, and transient cerebral ischemia at entry, and followed for an average of 60.2 months.  The 21,738 physicians who were also free from angina pectoris at baseline constituted the study population for the present analyses.  RESULTS: During 106,652 person-years of follow-up, 331 patients with confirmed angina pectoris were diagnosed, 194 of whom underwent a coronary revascularization procedure (coronary artery bypass graft surgery or coronary angioplasty).  As compared to participants assigned placebo, the relative risk of confirmed angina pectoris in the aspirin group was 1.10 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.88 to 1.38).  For coronary revascularization, the relative risk was 1.19 (95% CI, 0.88 to 1.59).  After simultaneous control for other coronary risk factors in a proportional-hazards model, these relative risks remained near unity at 1.07 (95% CI, 0.84 to 1.36) and 1.11 (95% CI, 0.81 to 1.52), respectively.  When the risks of angina pectoris were examined according to year of randomization in the trial, there was no pattern of increasing benefit with longer duration of treatment.  CONCLUSION: These randomized trial data indicate that chronic platelet inhibition with low-dose aspirin for an average duration of 60.2 months does not reduce the incidence of angina pectoris.
In vitro and in vivo evaluation of intraluminal ultrasound in normal and atherosclerotic arteries.  This study evaluated the dimensional and morphologic precision of arterial images obtained using intraluminal rotating A-scan ultrasound catheters [5.0F (30 mHz) and 8.0F (20 mHz)].  Dimensions of in vitro ultrasound images from human arteries (eight normal and nine arteriosclerotic) were compared with those from histologic sections of the vessels.  In addition, in vivo ultrasound studies (23 normal and 22 arteriosclerotic) of canine femoral arteries were compared with luminal dimensions obtained from angiograms of the vessels.  The correlation of in vitro ultrasound images to luminal diameters (n = 22, r = 0.96), adventitial diameters (n = 19, r = 0.83), and wall thickness (n = 19, r = 0.68) in normal human vessels was significant (p less than 0.05).  In vitro measurements of images and histologic specimens from human atherosclerotic arteries also correlated significantly (p less than 0.05) with luminal diameters (n = 27, r = 0.91), adventitial diameters (n = 24, r = 0.60), and wall thickness (n = 24, r = 0.62).  Morphologically, in vitro images of the wall of normal human arteries had a concentric laminated appearance and atherosclerotic vessels had patchy echodense and echolucent areas.  In vivo studies showed significant correlation of diameters for both normal (n = 16, r = 0.91, p less than 0.05) and arteriosclerotic (n = 16, r = 0.57, p less than 0.05) canine arteries compared with luminal dimensions measured from uniplanar angiograms.  We conclude that rotating A-scan intraluminal ultrasound accurately defines both normal and atherosclerotic arterial wall morphology and dimensions.  This technology may be valuable for intravascular guidance of angioplasty devices by identifying the location and consistency of lesions.
Stunned myocardium during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.  The "stunned myocardium" is a syndrome of reversible myocardial dysfunction that may be mediated by oxygen-derived free radicals.  This phenomenon has been seen in some neonates undergoing extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.  We performed echocardiograms and measured creatine phosphokinase isoenzymes and lipid peroxide levels in 16 neonates before, during, and after extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.  Infants who developed stunned myocardia by echocardiography did so shortly after initiation of bypass and exhibited concurrent elevations of the MB fraction of creatine phosphokinase.  Lipid peroxide levels did not simultaneously rise.  These data suggest that oxygen-derived free radicals may not cause the stunned myocardium seen in neonates undergoing extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
Circulating plasma platelet activating factor in persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn.  Platelet activating factor (PAF) is an endogenous phospholipid mediator that causes pulmonary hypertension and thrombocytopenia in experimental animal models.  To investigate circulating PAF in persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN), we studied PAF and its degradative enzyme, acetylhydrolase.  Thirteen neonates with PPHN, diagnosed by routine clinical methods including echocardiography, were compared to six age-matched control patients with respiratory distress.  Overall, plasma PAF levels were elevated in patients with PPHN compared to control patients (20.1 +/- 3.9 versus 1.6 +/- 0.7 ng/ml, p less than 0.01).  In addition, plasma PAF concentrations in patients with PPHN correlated with the severity of disease as defined by the delta AaPO2 (r = 0.65, p = 0.015).  In three patients with elevated PAF levels, as the clinical status improved, the plasma PAF values decreased.  Acetylhydrolase activity was similar in both groups (3.96 +/- 0.90 versus 3.78 +/- 1.44 nmol/ml/min, p = NS).  We conclude that PAF production is increased in PPHN and that abnormal production of PAF may be associated with pulmonary hypertension.
An analysis of outcome following percutaneous transluminal coronary artery angioplasty. An autopsy series.  We analyzed autopsy findings on 26 patients who died following percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA).  Twenty-one patients died within 3 weeks of undergoing PTCA; demonstrable cardiac complications were found in 19 patients: platelet-fibrin thrombi (10 patients [48%]), coronary artery dissections (17 patients [81%]), thromboemboli (13 patients [62%]), atheroemboli (seven patients [33%]), and myocardial infarcts (17 patients [81%]).  An increased incidence of coronary platelet-fibrin thrombi was noted when compared with a non-PTCA cardiac autopsy population (five of 53 patients).  Apparently there was an increased incidence of coronary atheroemboli and thromboemboli in the patients with coronary platelet-fibrin thrombi (eight patients) when compared with patients who did not have platelet-fibrin thrombi (five patients), although this was not statistically significant.  There was no evidence of a systemic hypercoagulable state or of disseminated intravascular coagulation.  The pathogenesis of this is unclear; however, vasospasm and a disruption of the endothelial surface induced by PTCA with subsequent platelet activation are possible causes.  Although not statistically significant, there was a proponderance of female subjects (seven patients) and an increased incidence of diabetes mellitus (six patients) and hypertension (13 patients) when compared with a control population of all patients undergoing PTCA at The Cleveland (Ohio) Clinic Foundation in 1987, suggesting that diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and female sex may be clinical risk factors for fatal complications following PTCA.
The real impact of mechanical bridge strategy in patients with severe acute infarction.  Results obtained in the past 3 years in patients referred with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and cardiogenic shock for a mechanical bridge to urgent transplantation permit one to assess the real impact of the present strategy in clinical practice.  Ten patients (mean age = 49) were admitted in serious condition (CI = 1.8 +/- 0.2 L/min/m2, PCWP = 28 +/- 6 mmHg, systolic aortic pressure = 88 +/- 20 mmHg, urine output 11 +/- 20 ml/hr) and were treated by maximal sympathomimetic support and i.v.  enoximone.  Two had to be implanted with a total artificial heart (TAH) and one with a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) for recurrent fibrillation despite hemodynamic improvement, within 8 hr.  Two have received transplants and are living well after 20 months.  Seven who initially improved markedly have been listed as urgent transplant candidates: two of these have been successfully transplanted, and three died suddenly after 6, 25, and 45 days, respectively.  One has undergone successful coronary surgery.  One patient (age 62, diabetic) was secondarily rejected for a transplant and died.  This experience clearly shows that despite initial spectacular hemodynamic improvement, which was due to optimized medical management, death rate before transplant because of sudden ventricular fibrillation remains unacceptably high.  This should prompt early mechanical support, with less invasive systems, in patients with AMI.
Complement activation and use of a cell saver in cardiopulmonary bypass.  Complement activation was evaluated in ten patients undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) and intraoperative blood salvage with a cell saver (CS) to assess the inflammatory response related to the CS.  The washed red blood cell concentrate was reinfused after protamine injection.  Plasma C3a was measured by radioimmunoassay preoperatively, 5 min before CPB, at 5, 60, and 90 min during CPB, 5 min after protamine infusion, at the end of surgery, and after 24 hr.  In addition, a clinical score based on renal, pulmonary, neurologic, and myocardial postoperative evolution was given (0-8) to every patient.  Results were compared with the C3a changes and clinical scores obtained from 26 routine (no CS) cardiac surgical patients.  Results showed maximal C3a generation after protamine and no further activation in cases of CS concentrate reinfusion, which ranged from 400 ml to 2,000 ml.  No difference in clinical score was observed between the CS (1 +/- 1) and control (0.85 +/- 0.6) groups.  The authors conclude that the CS does not enhance complement activation resulting from extracorporeal circulation and can be safely used as a blood saving strategy in cardiac surgery.
Differential light scattering cuvettes for the measurement of thromboemboli in high shear blood flow systems.  Newly developed optical scattering cuvettes were constructed as a modification of our existing 1.0 mm and 3.0 mm internal diameter (ID) cuvettes to facilitate the measurement of platelet microemboli ranging from 20 microns to 1,000 microns diameter in whole blood in 0.9 mm ID flows ranging from 250 to 4,000 ml/min.  A perturbation solution to the one-speed radiative transport equation was used in the design and calibration of these cuvettes.  A series of tests were performed with these cuvettes in an extracorporeal left ventricular assist device bovine model, and in a recirculating closed-loop flow system containing anticoagulated whole baboon blood, to determine to what extent they affect platelet and erythrocyte function ex vivo and in vitro.  Serial hemolysis tests, thromboxane radioimmunoassay measurements, platelet counts, and activated partial thromboplastin times were measured.  All of these tests with cuvettes in the extracorporeal and in vitro circuits were statistically indistinguishable from baseline measurements, suggesting the usefulness of this system for the measurement of microemboli in blood-contacting materials of extracorporeal circuits and cardiac assist devices.
Design mediated thrombus reduction in the Utah-100 total artificial heart.  The Utah-100 total artificial heart was initially designed and tested in 1983.  General design goals, including improved fit for human application, improved reliability, and elimination of thrombus formation, were identified as improvements over the clinically used Jarvik-7 artificial heart, previously developed at the Institute for Biomedical Engineering, University of Utah.  Specific design goals included 1) elimination of connector and valve-associated thrombus formation and 2) elimination of gross mineralization, thrombus formation, and creases on the blood-pumping diaphragm of the device.  Explant retrieval results from 29 calves and sheep implanted with the Jarvik-7 artificial heart were compared with results from 25 calves and sheep implanted with the Utah-100 artificial heart.  Macroscopic thrombus formation was found in 44% of the connectors of the Jarvik-7 artificial-hearts, compared with 2% (p less than or equal to 0.01) in animals with the Utah-100 artificial heart.  Subvalvular and supravalvular thrombi were observed in 33% of the valves in the Jarvik-7 artificial heart and 10% (p less than or equal to 0.01) of the valves in the Utah-100 artificial heart.  Mineralization of the pumping diaphragm was observed in 12% of the animals implanted with the Jarvik-7 artificial heart and in 4% of the animals with the Utah-100 diaphragms.  Thrombus formation in the diaphragm-housing interface occurred in 2% of Jarvik-7 ventricles and in 6% of the Utah-100 ventricles.  There were no identifiable diaphragm creases in the Utah-100 diaphragms, but a 10% incidence was found in Jarvik-7 devices.  These results validate substantial progress toward improved design and fabrication methods in the Utah-100 total artificial heart.
In vitro and in vivo testing of a new valved intravascular catheter design.  Long-term intravascular catheterization carries a finite risk of catheter occlusion.  A catheter tip valve design is presented (Buchwald-Wigness, Strato Medical Corporation, Beverly, MA) which incorporates features designed to decrease the risk of thromboembolism and reduce the need for maintenance procedures.  Aspiration and infusion are controlled by separate valves, making it possible to engineer optimized inlet and outlet parameters.  The outlet valve is an elastic sleeve expanded around the sidewall outlet ports which opens under injection pressure.  The inlet valve is a tubular elastic element compressed against the inlet port from within the lumen, opening under aspiration pressure.  A series of valves were prototyped with outlet pressures ranging from 2 to 100" H2O, and inlet pressures ranging from -40-70" H2O, and flowrates at 36" H2O of greater than 1,400 ml/hr.  Dog implants of two prototypes with outlet valve pressures of 10" H2O, and inlet pressures of -40" H2O, demonstrated that dormant periods of up to 7.5 weeks could be achieved without detectable blood cell entry into the lumen.  No significant hemolysis was observed in blood samples aspirated with a 6 cc syringe (8% scored "slightly hemolyzed" vs.  44% with the nonvalved controls) indicating that a hemodialysis application is likely.
In vitro and in vivo evaluation of a right ventricular assist device.  A simple right ventricular assist device (RVAD) has been developed.  This device will be useful in situations where biventricular failure has been partially treated by placement of a left ventricular assist device, or when right ventricular failure occurs in isolation.  This pneumatically actuated, R-wave synchronized, sac type pump contains no valves, and is connected by a graft to the pulmonary artery.  The RVAD was tested in a circulation simulator to verify its hemodynamic efficacy and then implanted in six calves for 2-4 weeks to evaluate its biocompatibility.  In vitro testing of the RVAD demonstrated that it restored normal hemodynamics in the presence of severe simulated RVF.  In six animal implantations, a small amount of thrombus was found in one pump.  No anticoagulants were employed.  Thrombus was present in the connecting graft in three animals; in two this was clearly related to technical implant errors.  No evidence of significant hemolysis was found.  This simple RVAD has been found to be hemodynamically effective, is simple to use, and is well tolerated.  Refinements in the interconnection graft between the pulmonary artery and the device are necessary.
Pulmonary artery counterpulsation with a skeletal muscle power source.  We evaluated the feasibility of using skeletal muscle (SM) to provide pulmonary artery (PA) counterpulsation in an acute pulmonary hypertension (PHT) model.  PA counterpulsation was achieved in six dogs with a dual chambered pump powered by the latissimus dorsi muscle.  A rate-responsive stimulator was used to make the muscle contract in counterpulsation.  Graded PHT was induced by infusing 150 microns glass beads into the PA, while RV and PA pressures were monitored.  With PA pressures ranging from 19/10 to 115/62 mmHg, effective counterpulsation was observed.  The degree of counterpulsation was influenced by the extent of PHT induced, with the amount of RV tension-time index (TTI) unloading correlated with the level of PA systole (r = 0.92).  Therefore, results were divided into two groups (Group 1: PA systole less than or equal to 40 mmHg, and Group 2: PA systole greater than 40 mmHg).  In Group 1, RV TTI decreased from 11.29 +/- 0.76 to 9.99 +/- 0.72 mmHg.sec, PA diastole increased from 20 +/- 2.3 to 31 +/- 3.0 mmHg, and PA mean increased from 24 +/- 2.2 to 2.9 +/- 2.2 mmHg (all p less than 0.05).  In Group 2, RV TT1 decreased from 15.12 +/- 1.83 to 10.99 +/- 0.90 mmHg.sec, PA diastole increased from 41 +/- 3.5 to 64 +/- 6.2 mmHg, and PA mean increased from 49 +/- 4.8 to 55 +/- 5.7 mmHg (all p less than 0.05).
Novacor left ventricular assist filling and ejection in the presence of device complications.  In order to better understand the relationship among certain device related complications and Novacor left ventricular assist system (LVAS) pumping parameters, a Mock Circulatory Loop was utilized to simulate the following clinically realistic conditions: 1) inflow valve regurgitation, 2) inflow cannula obstruction, 3) outflow valve regurgitation, and 4) outflow cannula obstruction.  Various pumping parameters (e.g., pump rate, stroke volume, pump output) were recorded at baseline (control) and during each simulation.  Additionally, pump volumes were continuously recorded and differentiated for calculation of rates of pump filling (FR) and ejection (ER).  The results indicate that perfusion pressures and rates of filling and ejection change significantly in the presence of device complications.  The implications of these findings, as relates to assessment of pump operation in LVAS patients, are discussed.
A novel mechanical cardiac assist device for reversing left ventricular failure.  Diastolic augmentation of aortic pressure is an efficacious means of improving coronary perfusion in heart failure.  A novel mechanical cardiac assist device (MCAD), that has advantages over a conventional intraaortic balloon pump and left ventricular assist devices, has been developed.  It consists of a high efficiency rotary solenoid, coupled to a pair of actuator plates that clamp on a shunt aortic graft section, and operates in a diastolic counterpulsation mode.  The system has been evaluated in six anesthetized, thoracotomized dogs with myocardial ischemia.  The MCAD was activated 30-40 min after coronary artery occlusion and synchronized with the R-wave.  As illustrated by a representative sample of the data obtained from one of several trials, the preliminary experimental results demonstrated that the MCAD worked effectively to fulfill the primary functions of a counterpulsation assist device, i.e., augmentation of coronary perfusion and reduction in the vascular impedance to ventricular ejection.
ECMO assisted angioplasty for cardiomyopathy patients with unstable angina.  Patients who are otherwise unsuitable candidates for coronary bypass surgery or standard coronary angioplasty (PTCA) may be successfully treated with PTCA during ECMO.  Five patients (3 men, 2 women), with a mean age of 57 years, are reported on here.  They were not considered good candidates for standard therapy because of poor left ventricular function (mean EF, 24; range, 16 to 28%).  Patients were supported by percutaneous femoral bypass using a BARD CPS machine, and underwent successful PTCA of either two vessels (three patients) or three vessels (two patients); in addition, one patient had dilatation of a stenotic aortic valve.  Patients were supported with ECMO for 26 to 140 (mean 104) minutes, and required transfusion with 0 to 4 (mean 2) units of blood during or after the procedure.  Complications included groin hematoma in two patients.  All were discharged within 4 days of the procedure.  Follow-up of the patients has been completed (4-7 mo) with no further hospitalizations for unstable angina.  All patients remain in NYHA Class II or III.  These data suggest that ECMO-assisted angioplasty is a safe and effective method of palliation of unstable angina associated with cardiomyopathy.
Bioenergetic recovery processes of injured myocardium.  We employed cervically transplanted nonworking myocardium to simulate the condition of a heart supported by a ventricular assist device, and to investigate the bioenergetic recovery processes of injured myocardium with 31P nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques.  A heterotopic graft was placed in the cervical portion of a recipient rat.  One week later, a control 31P NMR spectrum was obtained from the graft.  On the same day, the aorta of the graft was clamped for 30 minutes at room temperature.  After this procedure, 31P NMR measurements of the graft were performed for 1 week.  The phosphocreatine (PCr)/Inorganic phosphate (Pi) ratio, and beta-phosphate from adenosine triphosphate (beta-ATP)/Pi ratio on the first and second day after injury were significantly lower than control (p less than 0.05).  However, these ratios recovered to a significant extent on the third and fourth day.  These results suggest that 3 or 4 days are required for bioenergetic recovery of reversibly injured myocardium, even under nonworking conditions.
Additional salutary hemodynamic effects of the combined use of the paraaortic counterpulsation device and intraaortic balloon pump versus a paraaortic counterpulsation device alone.  The hemodynamic effects of the combined use of the paraaortic counterpulsation device (PACD) (stroke volume 65 ml) implanted on the ascending aorta, and a 20 ml intraaortic balloon pump (IABP) placed in the descending aorta, were compared with the PACD working alone in 12 dogs after the induction of heart failure.  Heart failure was characterized by left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) greater than 18 mmHg and systolic aortic pressure (SAP) in stage A: 116 mmHg greater than or equal to SAP greater than 70 mmHg; in stage B: 70 mmHg greater than or equal to SAP greater than 30 mmHg; and in stage C: SAP less than or equal to 30 mmHg.  Both modalities of mechanical assistance produced significant salutary hemodynamic effects in stages A and B.  No difference was observed in stage C.  In conclusion, the combined use of PACD and IABP is more effective than the use of either of these devices alone.  This modality of mechanical assistance may easily be applied in patients that cannot be weaned from extracorporeal circulation, and in whom IABP was unsuccessfully applied.
Hemodynamic effects of a new right ventricular assist device.  A right ventricular assist device (VAD) based on the principle of counterpulsation has been developed at our institution.  The device is a valveless, pneumatically actuated, 40 cc, sac-type pump, with a single inlet-outlet port.  For right ventricular support, the "Uniport" pump is anastamosed end-to-side to the pulmonary artery.  In previous experimental trials, the device has been shown to impart minimal trauma to blood components.  In this study, biventricular failure was induced in eight Holstein calves by normothermic ischemia during cardiopulmonary bypass.  A Pierce-Donachy left VAD (LVAD) was used for left ventricular support following the ischemic insult.  Hemodynamic measurements were obtained throughout the study, and each animal served as its own control.  A significant increase in post injury cardiac output (33.5 +/- 11.4%) was obtained with use of the Uniport and LVAD, as compared to use of the LVAD alone (p less than or equal to 0.005).  Other hemodynamic parameters of right heart failure, including right atrial pressure (RAP), pulmonary artery pressure (PAP), and left atrial pressure (LAP) were not significantly affected.  These data suggest that the Uniport right ventricular assist device significantly improves cardiac output in this model of moderate right ventricular failure.  Additional studies are required, however, to optimize pump stroke volume, and to further define the performance envelope of the device.
Light scattering detection of microemboli in an extracorporeal LVAD bovine model.  Thromboembolization studies were performed on two calves supported by extracorporeal left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) using a light scattering (He Ne Laser) microemboli detector (LSMD).  The LSMD system was placed on the outflow cannula of the LVAD in the extracorporeal loop of each animal.  The measurements included the size, number, and rate of production of circulating microemboli in the range 20 microns less than microemboli diameter less than 1,000 microns.  These data were compared to independently and concurrently obtained measurements of emboli shear rate (CPF), platelet count, red blood count (RBC), leukocyte count (WBC), plasma free hemoglobin, factors XIII, X, and V, and sorbitol dehydrogenase.  Embolic number and volume were seen to be most dynamic in the very early phases of acute thromboembolization (0-40 minutes) with a peak embolic response within the first 30 minutes.  The dynamics of reduced emboli volume, rather than number, may be implicated in the later stages of the thromboembolic passivation of these ventricles.  The LSMD results generally showed an inverse correlation of microemboli volume rate with CPF measurements for each ventricle.  LSMD, CPF, and leukocyte and platelet counts, showed a direct correlation with reduced counts for each additional ventricle for both calves.  Factor XII was seen to have a more direct correlation in time with LSMD measurements for each ventricle than other parameters under investigation.  This study represents the first time laser scattering and filtration methods have been applied simultaneously with hematologic assays in order to study the dynamics of device associated thrombogenesis.
Comparison of right ventricular and biventricular circulatory support in a porcine model of right heart failure.  The effects of right ventricular (RVAD) and biventricular assist devices (BVAD) in an acute porcine model of right heart ischemic failure produced by occluding the right coronary artery for 2 min (RCAO) were compared.  Right and left ventricular pressures were measured with Millar transducers and respective septal-to-free wall dimensions (RVSFWD, LVSFWD) with ultrasonic crystals.  RCAO alone resulted in significant right heart failure, marked by a 36 +/- 5% reduction in cardiac output (pulmonary artery flow) and a 54 +/- 16% reduction in RV stroke work.  Isolated RVAD significantly improved the hemodynamic conditions by restoring pulmonary blood flow and left heart filling to control levels.  RVAD also resulted in reduced RVSFWD to control levels and increased LVSFWD via a rightward septal shift due to right heart unloading.  Biventricular support resulted in the same hemodynamic improvement, but estimated LV peak systolic wall stress was reduced by 65 +/- 15% compared with control, due to concomitant LV unloading and reductions in LVSFWD.  Therefore, either right or biventricular devices are effective in treating RV failure.  The advantage of biventricular support is that the left ventricle is also unloaded, thus allowing improved circulatory support with minimal LV wall stress.
Hemodynamic influence of LVAD on right ventricular failure.  Left ventricular assist device (LVAD) pumping has hemodynamic and anatomic influences on right ventricular performance.  A total artificial heart (TAH) model was employed to better understand the hemodynamic influence of an LVAD on the failing right ventricle.  Biventricular failure was simulated by reducing both ventricular drive pressures of the TAH.  After getting hemodynamic data, LVAD pumping in the case of right ventricular failure was simulated by increasing just the left ventricular drive pressure.  In the LVAD-simulating condition, cardiac output increased and right atrial pressure decreased significantly (p less than 0.05) compared with the biventricular failure condition, whereas right ventricular function and minute work were the same in these two conditions.  Even though changes were accompanied by adaptive increases in pulmonary resistance, substantially lower pulmonary artery and left atrial pressures resulted in the LVAD-simulating condition.  From a hemodynamic perspective, these results indicate that an LVAD can increase right ventricular volume work by decreasing right ventricular pressure work, whereas right ventricular net pressure-volume work is unchanged and right ventricular failure is not worsened.
Left ventricular versus left atrial cannulation for the Thoratec ventricular assist device.  In a retrospective study of 28 patients (23 men, 5 women) supported with ventricular assist devices greater than 3 days, the effect of LV cannulation versus LA cannulation on device performance was compared.  Patients ranged in age from 12 to 67 years (mean 46 years) and were supported for 3-81 days (mean 15 years).  Fifteen patients were supported with left VADs (6 LV and 9 LA), and 13 patients were supported with BVADs (5 LV and 8 LA).  The mode of operation 91% of the time was the fill-to-empty mode.  Ten data points were taken for each patient.  LV cannulation results in higher VAD flow index at decreased preload, lower VAD systolic and vacuum pressures, and shorter diastolic durations.  Eleven of the 28 patients survived.  Although survival was greater in patients with LV cannulation, survival was more dependent upon reversibility of myocardial damage, eligibility for transplantation, or the development of complications.  These data indicate that LV cannulation provides better VAD performance than LA cannulation in the fill-to-empty mode.
Early and late tamponade with the Novacor left ventricular assist system.  Cardiac tamponade can be a major complication after implantation of the Novacor left ventricular assist system (LVAS).  Between 1987 and 1989, 14 patients received an LVAS as a bridge to cardiac transplantation: 3 developed early tamponade (33 +/- 12 hr postoperatively) and 5 were diagnosed with a late tamponade (9.4 +/- 3.2 days postoperatively).  One patient had both early and late tamponade.  Early tamponade was more common in those with increased perioperative blood loss (5,270 +/- 1,942 ml vs.  1,420 +/- 1,160 ml in other patients, p less than 0.05).  Early tamponade was suggested by reduction in mean arterial pressure (74 +/- 1 to 64 +/- 3 mmHg), LVAS output (5 +/- 0.5 to 2.7 +/- 0.7 L/min), LVAS stroke volume (55 +/- 4 to 23 +/- 5 ml), and an increase in central venous pressure (13 +/- 1 to 21 +/- 1 mmHg, p less than 0.05 for all values).  Late tamponade was associated with a marked rise in central venous pressure (14 +/- 1 to 22 +/- 2 mmHg, p less than 0.05), with only a mild decrease in LVAS output (4.9 +/- 1 to 3.8 +/- 0.9 L/min) and stroke volume (49 +/- 8 to 36 +/- 3 ml), without a significant change in mean arterial pressure.  Two of these five late episodes occurred in patients who were anticoagulated with heparin (PTT 52 and 100 sec), and in one other with warfarin (PT 27 sec, PTT 55 sec); two patients were not on any anticoagulants.  Surgical drainage of pericardial effusions, and especially of clotted blood found frequently posterior to the left ventricle in the space created by the LVAS decompressed left ventricle, resulted in an immediate return of all hemodynamic measurements to normal in both early and late tamponade.
Hemopump ventricular support for patients undergoing high risk coronary angioplasty.  Prophylactic implantation of a Hemopump (Johnson and Johnson, Skillman, NJ) has been evaluated in nine patients selected for high risk coronary angioplasty.  They were unstable patients, refractory to maximal pharmacology, with indications for revascularization, but contraindications for surgery such as low ejection fraction and lack of material for bypass.  In all, the target lesion was located on the last patent vessel.  The pump was inserted under local anesthesia, without any graft.  A specially designed occluder permitted avoidance of retrograde bleeding during implantation.  The bypass flow ranged from 2.5 to 3.2 L/min, and permitted a rise in cardiac index from 2.05 to 2.55 L/min/m2, with a drop in capillary wedge pressure from 13 (7-18) to 10 (7-13) mmHg.  During balloon inflation, no electrocardiographic changes were observed, because only minor ventricular arrhythmias occurred.  No significant hemolysis was seen (plasma free hemoglobin less than 10 mg/dl in all) after 2 hr of pumping.  The only limitation of the technique appears to be difficulty at the time of implantation from narrow, stenosed, or tortuous iliofemoral arteries (3 patients).  This experience strongly supports the benefit of temporary left ventricular Hemopump support in high-risk situations and clearly shows the need for a smaller pump.
A blood-liquid interface for prolonged extracorporeal oxygenation with excellent antithrombogenicity.  The authors verified the excellent antithrombogenicity of a blood-liquid interface (BLI) and introduced an oxygenator based on the principle of gas exchange across direct BLI.  In a newly developed oxygenator, three layers of liquid flowed horizontally, contacting one another: O2 saturated silicone oil on the top, O2 saturated fluorcarbon at the bottom, and blood in the middle.  Gas exchange was carried out across both direct BLIs.  This system provided excellent antithrombogenicity as well as good gas exchange.  The results indicate that this method will become a promising modality for prolonged extracorporeal oxygenation.
Increase of intraplatelet free calcium ion during extracorporeal circulation with a hollow fiber oxygenator: arterial filter and dynamics of platelet thrombosis on oxygenator and filter in a pig model.  Intraplatelet free calcium (IPFC) ions provide a common pathway for platelet activation leading to thrombosis and embolization.  IPFC levels were determined by chlorotetracycline fluorometry during extracorporeal circulation (ECC) with systemic heparin in eight Yorkshire pigs (weighing 30-40 kg; 3 control and 5 ECC); the ratio of slow phase organelle calcium sequestration to fast phase platelet-membrane binding is an index of free calcium.  During 3 hr of ECC with a hollow fiber oxygenator (HFO) (Bentley CM-50) and AF (Bentley 1025), seven blood samples were collected 5 min before and during ECC.  The platelet deposition (CPM/microCi) on HFO (PDHFO) was simultaneously measured with In-111-labeled autologous platelets (300-400 microCi) and a Geiger probe detector at -5, 0, 5, 30, 45, 60, 120, and 180 min.  During ECC, IPFC and HFO thrombus increase significantly (p less than 0.05) at 45 min with respect to control IPFC values of 0.4 +/- 0.1, suggesting direct participation of calcium activated platelets in thrombosis on HFO.  The decline of IPFC is due to extrusion and sequestration by dense granules, and decline in HFO thrombus is due to embolization.  On the other hand, the embolus in the arterial filter was trapped in a linear fashion, with a consistent increase with time of ECC.
LVAS pump performance following initiation of left ventricular assistance.  Prevention of disturbed flow (e.g., flow stasis) and consequent thrombosis in heart pumps is based upon design characteristics determined during laboratory bench tests.  These tests employ optimal filling and emptying characteristics, such as the full-fill to complete empty mode in the Novacor left ventricular assist system.  Filling characteristics of the Novacor LVAS were examined during the first 48 hours after implantation in 14 patients.  Fill volume of the pump was reduced in pathologic states, such as cardiac tamponade, and following the initiation of right ventricular mechanical circulatory support.  In addition, multiple regression analysis revealed that right ventricular function measured by the amount of inotropic support required, the right ventricular ejection fraction, and the total pulmonary resistance, significantly predicted left ventricular assist pump fill volume during the first 48 hours of support.  Flow visualization simulating these clinical conditions of incomplete filling suggest inadequate valve washing, particularly around the inlet valve and its conduit, which may predispose to thrombus formation.
Clinical use of the Berlin Biventricular Assist Device as a bridge to transplantation.  The Berlin Artificial Heart System/Biventricular Assist Device (BVAD) was used in 38 patients.  1) Twenty-eight patients were awaiting cardiac transplantation (Tx) (age 23-56 yrs).  All patients had contraindications not allowing immediate Tx.  2) Five patients were emergency cases not on our Tx list (postcardiotomy cardiac failure, acute myocarditis) (age 28-59).  3) Five patients were post Tx patients with graft failure (age 22-52).  Extracorporal circulation was used for implantation of the BVAD.  In group 1, 21 of 28 patients (pts) recovered, and all were subsequently transplanted after 6 hours to 39 days, when all organ function was restored.  In 7 pts, mechanical circulation was terminated after 1-40 days because of further deterioration.  Five of the transplanted pts died, 14 pts survived (greater than 30 days), and 2 pts were just transplanted with satisfactory postoperative courses.  Of group 2 and 3 pts, two were successfully weaned.  In one patient the allograft recovered after 11 days of support.
The dynamics of platelet thrombus formation rate, thrombus retention time, and rate of embolization on a control and heparin bonded polyurethane angio-catheter.  The dynamics of platelet deposition and embolization from control and heparin bonded polyurethane catheters (CPC and HBPC) was evaluated with In-111 labeled autologous platelets (IN-PLT) and a computerized gamma camera (CGC).  Ten non-heparinized dogs (18-25 kg) were catheterized in both femoral arteries with 10 cm of CPC and HBPC (5 Fr., Cordis) 24 hr after injection of 300-420 microCi of In-PLT, and imaged for 3 hr with the computerized gamma camera.  The regional platelet deposition curves (RPDC) indicated multiple peaks and valleys; the curves were analyzed for early rate of thrombus formation (upswing), thrombus retention time (full width at half maxima of the RPDC-peak), and rate of embolization (downswing) on both catheters.  The four parameters (mean +/- SD) of thrombosis on catheters and integral of the radioactivity time curve for the 3 hr duration of imaging were calculated from normalized counts/sec.  The rate of thrombus formation and rate of embolization are higher for the control than HBPC, suggesting that heparin-bonding decreases the early rate of thrombosis and embolization.  The thrombus adhesivity and retention time appear shorter for the control catheter, indicating that the control thrombogenic catheter forms multiple thrombi and emboli than HBPC.  The integral appears larger for the control catheter than HBPC.  In vivo (dynamic) studies, in vitro studies, and critical analyses of the radioactivity time curve were essential for complete evaluation of thrombogenicity of catheters and other cardiovascular prostheses.
Socioeconomic conditions in childhood and ischaemic heart disease during middle age   OBJECTIVE--To examine the association between socioeconomic conditions in childhood and ischaemic heart disease in middle aged men, including the role of physiological and behavioural risk factors.  DESIGN--Prevalence study with extensive examination and testing and with recall of childhood conditions.  SETTING--Population based study in Kuopio, Finland.  SUBJECTS--Representative sample of 2679 men aged 42, 48, 54, and 60.  MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES--Ischaemic findings on progressive maximal exercise test.  RESULTS--Low socioeconomic style in childhood was associated with significantly higher prevalence of findings indicating ischaemias.  Compared with those in the highest tertile of childhood socioeconomic conditions, the age adjusted odds ratio for subjects in the lowest tertile was 1.44 and for those in the middle tertile 1.35.  Adjustment for years of cigarette smoking times the average number of cigarettes smoked, ratio of high density lipoprotein to low density lipoprotein cholesterol, fibrinogen and serum selenium concentrations, and adult height did not appreciably weaken the association.  Adjustment for adult socioeconomic state resulted in a 16% decline in the association.  The association was reduced to non-significance by adjustment for measures of prevalent cardiovascular illness.  CONCLUSIONS--Socioeconomic state in childhood was significantly associated with ischaemic heart disease in middle aged men.  Levels of risk factors measured at middle age did not account for this association, nor did adult height.  Because childhood socioeconomic conditions precede the development of ischaemic heart disease the substantial impact of prevalent illness on the observed association suggests that ischaemic heart disease develops earlier in those with lower socioeconomic state during childhood.
Buerger's colour.  Cyanosis of the hands and feet in Buerger's disease is known as 'Buerger's colour'.  This characteristic skin colour is produced by the subpapillary venous plexus.  The reactions of the subpapillary venous plexus in patients with Buerger's disease were observed by analysing the fractional blood volume of tissue using a visible light reflective spectrophotometer.  Capillary morphology was investigated using an intravital video-microscopic system.  Twenty-seven subjects, comprising 13 normals and 14 patients with Buerger's disease, were studied.  In the nailbeds of patients with Buerger's disease, an increase in the number of loops, cyanotic colour change and dilatation were observed.  In this condition there was incompetence of venular tonus and regurgitation at venular valves.  Buerger's colour is probably due to excessive congestion of venous blood in the subpapillary venous plexus which is produced by these mechanisms.
Cardiovascular response of a continuous variable rate alfentanil infusion for abdominal aortic surgery.  A prospective study was undertaken to determine the cardiovascular response of a continuous alfentanil infusion during abdominal aortic surgery (AAS).  Each subject (n = 20) received a beta-blocking drug preoperatively, and was premedicated with oral lorazepam.  Anaesthesia was induced with alfentanil 50 micrograms.kg-1 and thiopentone 3 mg.kg-1, and was maintained with a variable rate infusion of alfentanil and 66 per cent nitrous oxide in oxygen.  During the infusion, boluses of alfentanil, 7.5 micrograms.kg-1, were administered to maintain heart rate and blood pressure within 20 per cent of awake baseline values.  Haemodynamic stability during surgery was achieved with infusion rates varying between 0.5 and 2.5 micrograms.kg-1, which resulted in mean alfentanil serum concentrations ranging from 186 +/- 53 to 315 +/- 98 ng.ml-1.  The mean cumulative alfentanil dose was 15.4 +/- 6.2 mg.patient-1 for surgery which lasted an average of 141 +/- 41 min.  Throughout surgery, no patient required inhalational anaesthetic agents or vasoactive drugs.  Fifteen of the 20 patients had perioperative Holter monitoring.  No myocardial ischaemia was detected during the intraoperative period.  However, there was a 33 per cent incidence of myocardial ischaemia on the first postoperative day.  There were no myocardial infarcts and no deaths.  We conclude that in beta-blocked patients undergoing aortic reconstructive surgery, a variable rate alfentanil infusion administered with 66 per cent nitrous oxide provides anaesthesia characterized by good haemodynamic control without the need for supplemental agents or vasoactive drugs.
Increased rat cardiac angiotensin converting enzyme activity and mRNA expression in pressure overload left ventricular hypertrophy. Effects on coronary resistance, contractility, and relaxation.  We compared the activity and physiologic effects of cardiac angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) using isovolumic hearts from male Wistar rats with left ventricular hypertrophy due to chronic experimental aortic stenosis and from control rats.  In response to the infusion of 3.5 X 10(-8) M angiotensin I in the isolated buffer perfused beating hearts, the intracardiac fractional conversion to angiotensin II was higher in the hypertrophied hearts compared with the controls (17.3 +/- 4.1% vs 6.8 +/- 1.3%, P less than 0.01).  ACE activity was also significantly increased in the free wall, septum, and apex of the hypertrophied left ventricle, whereas ACE activity from the nonhypertrophied right ventricle of the aortic stenosis rats was not different from that of the control rats.  Northern blot analyses of poly(A)+ purified RNA demonstrated the expression of ACE mRNA, which was increased fourfold in left ventricular tissue obtained from the hearts with left ventricular hypertrophy compared with the controls.  In both groups, the intracardiac conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II caused a comparable dose-dependent increase in coronary resistance.  In the control hearts, angiotensin II activation had no significant effect on systolic or diastolic function; however, it was associated with a dose-dependent depression of left ventricular diastolic relaxation in the hypertrophied hearts.  These novel observations suggest that cardiac ACE is induced in hearts with left ventricular hypertrophy, and that the resultant intracardiac activation of angiotensin II may have differential effects on myocardial relaxation in hypertrophied hearts relative to controls.
Apical segmental dysfunction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: subgroup with unique clinical features.  A segmental wall motion abnormality is an unusual finding in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.  To clarify its clinical significance, 48 patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were analyzed.  Eight patients (Group A) had apical segmental dysfunction; 40 (Group B) had normal wall motion.  No patient in either group had coronary artery stenosis on selective coronary arteriography.  In all patients in Group A, apical segmental dysfunction was revealed by left ventriculography; however, it could be detected by echocardiography in only two patients in Group A.  Left ventricular hypertrophy by electrocardiogram (ECG) was more common in Group B (p less than 0.05).  Abnormal Q waves were more frequently discovered in Group A (p less than 0.005) and were recognized predominantly in the lateral leads.  On serial ECGs, a gradual development of abnormal Q waves was noted in six of eight patients in Group A.  Malignant arrhythmias were more common in Group A (p less than 0.001).  In two patients in Group A, left ventricular dilation and congestive heart failure developed during the follow-up period.  Thus, the presence of a Q wave in the lateral leads on an ECG in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may indicate the presence of apical segmental dysfunction.  Left ventriculography should be performed to examine the presence of this abnormality and 24 h ambulatory ECG monitoring should be done to detect malignant arrhythmias in patients who have abnormal Q waves in the lateral leads.  Patients with this unique type of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy need careful follow-up evaluation.
Contrast echocardiographic mapping of collateralized myocardium in humans before and after coronary angioplasty   Conventional coronary arteriography is able to demonstrate the presence of coronary collateral vessels but cannot delineate the specific region of myocardium to which they supply blood.  To test the hypothesis that contrast echocardiography can specifically identify collateralized myocardium, contrast echocardiographic perfusion "maps" were compared in patients with (n = 12) and without (n = 12) angiographic evidence of coronary collateral flow, both before and after coronary angioplasty.  Contrast echocardiographic images of the mid-left ventricle in the short-axis view at end-diastole were obtained after separate injections of a sonicated contrast agent into both the right and the left coronary arteries.  A computer-based contouring system was used to determine the individual areas of myocardium perfused by each of the two coronary arteries and then to superimpose the images of the two perfusion beds.  The resulting area of overlapping perfusion represented myocardium receiving blood flow from both coronary systems and was defined as collateralized myocardium.  To normalize for heart size, overlap area was expressed as a percent of total myocardial area, which was the area between endocardium and epicardium in the short-axis view.  To adjust for differences in vascular distribution, overlap area was expressed as a percent of the perfusion area of the recipient vessel.  In patients with angiographic collateral flow, the recipient vessel was that vessel receiving the collateral flow.  In patients without angiographic collateral flow, the right coronary artery was considered the recipient vessel.  Overlap area was 1.3 +/- 0.4% of total myocardial area and 6.6 +/- 1.7% of recipient vessel area in patients without angiographic evidence of collateral flow compared with 30.6 +/- 2.5% and 89.2 +/- 6.4%, respectively, in patients with angiographic collateral flow (p less than 0.001 for both).  In four patients in whom angiographic collateral flow was abolished by angioplasty, overlap area decreased from 30.3 +/- 5.3% to 6.8 +/- 2.7% of total myocardial area and from 100% to 18.5 +/- 5.4% of recipient vessel area (p less than 0.05 for both).  Thus, contrast echocardiography is able to map the specific myocardial territory perfused by coronary collateral flow and document an immediate reduction in perfusion in this territory when collateral flow is abolished by angioplasty.
Ventricular stroke work loss: validation of a method of quantifying the severity of aortic stenosis and derivation of an orifice formula   Because aortic stenosis results in the loss of left ventricular stroke work (due to resistance to flow through the valve and turbulence in the aorta), the percentage of stroke work that is lost may reflect the severity of stenosis.  This index can be calculated from pressure data alone.  The relation between percent stroke work loss and anatomic aortic valve orifice area (measured by planimetry from videotape) was investigated in a pulsatile flow model.  Thirteen valves were studied (nine human aortic valves obtained at necropsy and four bioprosthetic valves) at stroke volumes of 40 to 100 ml, giving 57 data points.  Valve area ranged from 0.3 to 2.8 cm2 and mean systolic pressure gradient from 3 to 84 mm Hg.  Percent stroke work loss, calculated as mean systolic pressure gradient divided by mean ventricular systolic pressure x 100%, ranged from 7 to 68%.  It was closely related to anatomic orifice area with an inverse exponential relation and was not significantly related to flow (r = -0.15).  An orifice formula was derived that predicted anatomic orifice area with a 95% confidence interval of +/- 0.5 cm2 (orifice area [cm2] = 4.82 [2.39 x log percent stroke work loss], r = -0.94, SEE = 0.029).  These results support the clinical use of percent stroke work loss as an easily obtained index of the severity of aortic stenosis.
Origin and significance of diastolic Doppler flow signals in the left ventricular outflow tract.  Diastolic Doppler flow signals (greater than or equal to 0.2 m/s) in the left ventricular outflow tract have not been well characterized, and their origin and significance remain controversial.  Fifty-nine patients (55 +/- 16 years of age) with technically good Doppler echocardiographic studies were studied prospectively.  There were 14 normal subjects, 21 patients with left ventricular hypertrophy, 10 with dilated cardiomyopathy and 14 with other cardiac disease.  The rhythm was sinus in 55 and atrial fibrillation in 4.  Two distinct Doppler flow signals were detected in the left ventricular outflow tract during diastole.  These were termed E' (early) and A' (active) because they occurred 40 to 100 ms after higher velocity mitral inflow E (passive filling) and A (atrial contraction) signals.  Among 59 patients, E' signals were present in 48 (81%) and had a mean velocity of 0.41 +/- 0.23 m/s.  In 55 patients with normal sinus rhythm, A' signals were present in 52 (95%) and had a mean velocity of 0.52 +/- 0.24 m/s.  No A' signals were present in the four patients with atrial fibrillation.  The E' and A' velocities by pulsed wave Doppler ultrasound were low at the left ventricular apex and increased along the basal septum in the left ventricular outflow tract.  Prominent A' velocities (greater than or equal to 0.45 m/s) were seen in 62% of patients with left ventricular hypertrophy, 50% of normal subjects and 10% of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy.  The A' velocity was higher in patients with left ventricular hypertrophy (0.63 +/- 0.26 m/s) than in those with a normal heart (0.45 +/- 0.16 m/s; p less than 0.05) or dilated cardiomyopathy (0.25 +/- 0.13 m/s; p less than 0.01).  The major determinants of diastolic outflow tract velocity were the mitral inflow E and A velocities and left end-diastolic dimension, particularly when combined (r = 0.64, p less than 0.0001 for E'; r = 0.72, p less than 0.0001 for A').  Distinctive E' and A' Doppler outflow tract signals result from mitral inflow and may be detected in most patients with normal heart size.  These E' and A' velocities increase from apex to base and are more prominent in patients with a small, normally contracting heart or left ventricular hypertrophy.
Reduction in incidence of inducible ventricular tachycardia after myocardial infarction by treatment with streptokinase during infarct evolution.  The aim of this study was to determine whether intravenous streptokinase administered with or without oral aspirin to patients with evolving myocardial infarction reduces the inducibility of ventricular tachycardia at electrophysiologic study and thus the risk of sudden death in infarct survivors.  Of 159 patients randomized at Westmead Hospital to the multicenter Second International Study of Infarct Survival (ISIS-2) after streptokinase and aspirin in acute myocardial infarction, 87 underwent electrophysiologic testing 6 to 28 days after infarction to determine their risk of subsequent ventricular arrhythmias (streptokinase 20 patients; aspirin 25 patients; streptokinase and aspirin 21 patients; both placebos 21 patients).  Patients who underwent electrophysiologic testing had similar clinical characteristics to those of patients who did not.  The stimulation protocol comprised up to and including four extrastimuli applied to the right ventricular apex at twice diastolic threshold.  An abnormal result was defined as ventricular tachycardia with a cycle length greater than or equal to 230 ms lasting greater than or equal to 10 s.  Ventricular tachycardia was inducible at electrophysiologic study in 8 patients who received placebo streptokinase, but in no patient who received active streptokinase (8 of 46 versus 0 of 41; p = 0.005, Fischer's exact test).  Ventricular tachycardia was inducible in 4 patients who received aspirin therapy and 4 who did not (4 of 41 versus 4 of 46; p = NS).  During a mean follow-up period of 39 +/- 9 months, there were no spontaneous episodes of ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation or witnessed sudden death in the streptokinase-treated group compared with three such events in the placebo-treated group (p = 0.13).  When compared with placebo therapy, intravenous streptokinase substantially reduced the incidence of inducible ventricular tachycardia in infarct survivors.  No similar benefit was attributable to aspirin therapy.
Effects of nicardipine, a calcium antagonist, on myocardial salvage and high energy phosphate stores in reperfused myocardial injury.  The current study determined the effectiveness of nicardipine, a 1,4-dihydropyridine calcium antagonist, in preserving reperfused myocardium in a cat model of temporary coronary occlusion and ascertained if replenishment of myocardial phosphate stores during reperfusion as defined by phosphorus-31 nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy was indicative of salvage.  Twenty open chest, anesthetized cats were studied with use of a snare ligature around the proximal left anterior descending coronary artery, with a coil sutured to the epicardial surface overlying the distribution of the artery.  Peak areas of phosphocreatine, inorganic phosphate and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) NMR signals were measured during 1 h of occlusion followed by 1.5 h of reperfusion.  Infarct size and jeopardy area were determined in vitro by simultaneous infusion of phthalocyanine blue dye and triphenyltetrazolium chloride into the aorta and the left anterior descending coronary artery, respectively, after 5 h of myocardial reperfusion.  Nicardipine-treated and control groups had similar jeopardy area values (41.2 +/- 1.6% versus 47.4 +/- 3.1% of the left ventricle), but infarct area was significantly reduced in the nicardipine-treated group (3.2 +/- 1.1% versus 24.9 +/- 7.5% of jeopardy area, p less than 0.01).  High energy phosphate compounds remained markedly altered during reperfusion in both groups.  No significant improvement in phosphocreatine or inorganic phosphate recovery was observed in animals pretreated with nicardipine despite an 87% reduction in infarct size.  Myocardial ATP was greater during reperfusion in the nicardipine-treated compared with the control group (average over initial 90 min of reperfusion 58 +/- 6% versus 46 +/- 3% of baseline values, p less than 0.05), suggesting improved recovery of ATP.  However, the measured levels of high energy phosphate compounds during reperfusion and their ratios did not correlate with infarct size and thus were not predictive of myocardial salvage.
Hemodynamic efficacy of rapid saline infusion and dobutamine versus saline infusion alone in a model of cardiac rupture.  Despite recent reports describing survival after cardiac rupture, the effectiveness of circulatory support while awaiting definitive surgical treatment is controversial.  To assess the efficacy of volume expansion and pharmacologic support in cardiac tamponade due to cardiac rupture, a model of hemorrhagic cardiac tamponade was developed and treatment with rapid saline infusion and dobutamine was compared with rapid saline infusion alone in 15 closed chest dogs.  A right ventricular wound of reproducible size was produced by deflating an aortic valvuloplasty balloon that had previously been passed by way of the internal jugular vein into the pericardial space and through a stab wound in the right ventricular free wall.  Hemodynamic values were compared at baseline, during tamponade and after a rapid infusion (1 liter at 100 ml/min) of either saline solution alone or saline solution plus dobutamine (20 micrograms/kg per min).  Atrial and pericardial pressures increased significantly in both groups.  Mean arterial pressure, cardiac output and stroke volume increased with combined saline and dobutamine infusion to values similar to those at baseline (91 +/- 19%, 114 +/- 43% and 94 +/- 37% of baseline, respectively).  In contrast, saline infusion alone caused a small increase in cardiac output but failed to significantly increase mean arterial pressure or stroke volume (76.8 +/- 14.2%, 55 +/- 18% and 51 +/- 17% of baseline, respectively).  Combined rapid infusion of saline solution and dobutamine infusion has a more beneficial hemodynamic effect and may be more effective than rapid saline infusion alone in resuscitating patients with hemorrhagic cardiac tamponade due to cardiac rupture.
Alterations in endocardial vascular resistance after reperfusion in a low flow, high demand model of ischemia: effects of dipyridamole and WEB-2086, a platelet-activating factor antagonist.  To determine if alterations in regional coronary vascular resistance could occur in the type of myocardial ischemia present in severe angina pectoris, regional perfusion and function were studied in 35 conscious sedated dogs.  A stenosis producing severe hypokinesia of the perfused segment was created for 2 h on the left anterior descending coronary artery and 10 episodes of 1 min of high demand ischemia (atrial pacing at a rate sufficient to induce dyskinesia in the hypoperfused segment) were superimposed before reperfusion.  The dogs were randomized into three treatment groups: control (n = 13), dipyridamole (n = 10) or WEB-2086 (n = 12), an antagonist of the effects of the endogenous platelet-activating factor.  During stenosis, residual endocardial blood flow in the ischemic but nonnecrotic area averaged 0.72 +/- 0.14, 0.38 +/- 0.13 and 0.68 +/- 0.17 ml/min per g in the control, WEB-2086 and dipyridamole groups, respectively.  Twenty-four hours after reperfusion, endocardial blood flow in the ischemic area was significantly lower in control dogs (1.04 +/- 0.15 ml/min per g) than in dogs treated with WEB-2086 (1.44 +/- 0.28 ml/min per g; p less than 0.03) or dipyridamole (3.00 +/- 0.83 ml/min per g; p less than 0.01).  Accordingly, in control dogs, endocardial coronary vascular resistance in the ischemic area was increased after reperfusion from 85 +/- 11 to 124 +/- 27 mm Hg/(ml/min per g) (p less than 0.05) after 24 h.  In contrast, coronary vascular resistance in the ischemic area remained unchanged in dogs receiving WEB-2086 (77 +/- 8 to 79 +/- 9 mm Hg/(ml/min per g); p = NS) and it decreased significantly in dogs receiving dipyridamole (72 +/- 8 to 44 +/- 8 mm Hg/(ml/min per g); p less than 0.01).  Regional function after 24 h remained depressed in all three groups.  These data indicate that low flow, high demand ischemia induces alterations in the subendocardial microvasculature.  Such alterations in regional coronary vascular resistance might play a role in several forms of ischemic heart disease such as in severe angina, but they appear susceptible to improvement by therapeutic interventions that influence granulocyte and platelet activation.
Early readmission of elderly patients with congestive heart failure.  Repetitive hospitalizations are a major health problem in elderly patients with chronic disease, accounting for up to one fourth of all inpatient Medicare expenditures.  Congestive heart failure, one of the most common indications for hospitalization in the elderly, is also associated with a high incidence of early rehospitalization, but variables identifying patients at increased risk and an analysis of potentially remediable factors contributing to readmission have not previously been reported.  We prospectively evaluated 161 patients 70 years or older that had been hospitalized with documented congestive heart failure.  Hospital mortality was 13% (n = 21).  Among patients discharged alive, 66 (47%) were readmitted within 90 days.  Recurrent heart failure was the most common cause for readmission, occurring in 38 patients (57%).  Other cardiac disorders accounted for five readmissions (8%), and noncardiac illness led to readmission in 21 cases (32%).  Factors predictive of an increased probability of readmission included a prior history of heart failure, four or more admissions within the preceding 8 years, and heart failure precipitated by an acute myocardial infarction or uncontrolled hypertension (all P less than .05).  Using subjective criteria, 25 first readmissions (38%) were judged possibly preventable, and 10 (15%) were judged probably preventable.  Factors contributing to preventable readmissions included noncompliance with medications (15%) or diet (18%), inadequate discharge planning (15%) or follow-up (20%), failed social support system (21%), and failure to seek medical attention promptly when symptoms recurred (20%).  Thus, early rehospitalization in elderly patients with congestive heart failure may be preventable in up to 50% of cases, identification of high risk patients is possible shortly after admission, and further study of nonpharmacologic interventions designed to reduce readmission frequency is justified.
Are blood pressure levels increasing in Denmark?  The Copenhagen City Heart Study is a prospective cardiovascular population study designed to evaluate the incidence of and risk factors for cardiovascular disease.  A random population sample comprising approximately 20,000 individuals was invited to participate.  Blood pressure was measured, and information regarding the use of antihypertensive medication was collected in an initial survey during the period 1976-1978 (attendance rate 74%) and from a second survey during the period 1981-1983 (attendance rate 70%).  A significant increase in systolic and diastolic blood pressure between survey 1 and survey 2 was found among both men and women greater than 40 years of age and not using antihypertensive medication.  The increase in blood pressure in the follow-up survey could not be explained by changes in methods, changes in the prescription of antihypertensive medication, or selection bias.  Factors associated with changes in systolic and diastolic blood pressure were examined by multiple linear regression analysis.  Both increase in body mass index and increase in alcohol consumption were positively correlated with changes in systolic and diastolic blood pressure, while use of antihypertensive medication, a high value of body mass index at survey 1 and a high level of education were negatively correlated with changes in systolic and diastolic blood pressure.  Female sex and advanced age were also negatively correlated with changes in diastolic blood pressure.  Consumption of tobacco and alcohol, income and changes in consumption of tobacco were not significantly correlated with changes in systolic and diastolic blood pressure.
Nisoldipine--effects on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and catecholamines. Studies in normotensive and hypertensive subjects.  We have studied the effects of nisoldipine, a new calcium channel antagonist, on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and on plasma catecholamines in 10 healthy volunteers and in 29 patients with primary essential hypertension.  Of these 29 patients, thirteen had normal renin hypertension (NRH), and sixteen had low renin hypertension (LRH).  Eight healthy volunteers received placebo.  Short-term (24 h) effects were measured in all subjects and long-term (up to 6 months) effects of 10-40 mg nisoldipine daily were monitored in the 29 hypertensive patients.  Plasma renin activity (PRA) increased slightly, although this rise was not statistically significant, 1 h after the first dose of nisoldipine in both normotensive subjects and hypertensive patients.  After 2 h PRA had returned to the pre-treatment level.  No change in PRA was observed after administration of placebo.  Plasma angiotensin II (AII) levels showed considerable variation after nisoldipine administration.  Plasma aldosterone levels decreased despite the increase in PRA and AII concentrations.  However, no concomitant reduction in urinary aldosterone excretion was observed.  Plasma noradrenaline levels increased slightly 2-4 h after administration of nisoldipine, and decreased again thereafter, but no changes in plasma adrenaline levels were seen.  Nisoldipine had no long-term effects on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system or on serum catecholamine levels.
Components of delay time in suspected acute myocardial infarction with particular emphasis on patient delay.  Two hundred and thirty-four patients admitted to a coronary care unit (CCU) were interviewed a few days after arrival in hospital to determine reasons for patient delay and the various components of total delay time from onset of symptoms to arrival in CCU.  Of the three major components of delay, decision time (time from onset of symptoms to decision to go to hospital), and hospital procedure time (time from arrival in hospital to arrival in the CCU), were of the same magnitude, 1 h 15 min and 1 h 30 min (median), whereas the median time for preparation and transportation to hospital was somewhat shorter, being 45 min.  Decision time appeared to be similar in patients with confirmed and non-confirmed acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and was not associated with intensity of pain or infarct size.  Half of the patients hesitated to go to hospital, which resulted in a prolonged decision delay (3 h).  It is concluded that patient indecision to seek medical help is the most important reason for delay in hospital arrival in patients with suspected AMI.
Prevalence of Raynaud phenomenon in the adult population of South Carolina.  A prevalence estimate for Raynaud phenomenon among adult residents of South Carolina was based on data obtained from respondents in a statewide health survey, followed by face-to-face interviews and clinical screening for Raynaud phenomenon, using a screening procedure developed by the authors.  The survey obtained 5246 personal interviews from a probability sample of over 3000 households, and 494 survey subjects participated in the clinical screening.  The prevalence estimates and their standard errors were computed using survey case weights, design-based estimation, and logistic modelling techniques.  The prevalence of Raynaud phenomenon among adult residents of South Carolina was determined to be 3.5%, with a standard error of 0.6%.  Prevalence was higher for females (4.3%, SE = 0.7%) than for males (2.7%, SE = 0.6%).  These figures are much lower than most estimates in the existing literature on Raynaud phenomenon.
Alcohol consumption and blood pressure: a comparison of native Japanese to American men.  We compared the cross-sectional association of alcohol consumption with blood pressure in 810 Japanese men (JM) living in Tokyo and 946 white men (WM) living in New York.  Mean systolic (JM and WM, p less than 0.001) and diastolic blood pressure (JM, p less than 0.002; WM, p less than 0.001) were associated with alcohol consumption in both groups.  Compared to abstainers, the heaviest drinkers had the highest systolic (JM, p = 0.001; WM, p less than 0.01) and diastolic (JM, p less than 0.002; WM, p less than 0.05) blood pressures.  The relation of blood pressure to alcohol intake was J-shaped in the Americans, but linear in the Japanese.  Exploratory analyses revealed that the J-shape may have been due to under-reporting of heavy alcohol ingestion by American abstainers.  When abstainers were excluded, the relationships were similar in both the American and Japanese.  The positive association between blood pressure and alcohol consumption persisted after adjustment for age, cigarette smoking, use of antihypertensive medications, body mass index, heart rate, abdominal skinfold thickness, hematocrit, fasting blood glucose, serum uric acid levels and urinary sodium/potassium ratio.  Alcohol use was also related to prevalence of hypertension.  These findings confirm the presence of an independent association between alcohol intake and blood pressure in both JM and WM and suggest that, despite differences in the metabolism of alcohol, the relation of alcohol consumption to blood pressure is similar in both nationalities.